Secretary of State Bev Clarno
Audits Division Director Kip Memmott
Oregon Department of Education
ODE Can Better Support Students Experiencing
Disabilities Through Improved Coordination and
Monitoring of Services
June 2020
Report 2020-24
Oregon Department of Education
ODE Can Better Support Students
Experiencing Disabilities Through Improved
Coordination and Monitoring of Services
What We Found
1. From 2018 to 2019, only 33.4% of Oregon children eligible for special
education through Early Intervention/Early Childhood Special Education
(EI/ECSE) programs received an adequate level of services, as defined by
ODE. For children eligible for ECSE services, only 61.6% of children with
low needs, 6.2% with medium, and 0.7% with high needs received an
adequate level of services. (pg. 8)
2. Oregon schools receive twice the standard per-student allocation of state
funds for students experiencing disabilities, yet this only applies for up to
11% of a district’s student population. The number of students
experiencing disabilities frequently surpasses this 11% cap, meaning the
need for services exceeds existing resources. (pg. 7)
3. Local education agencies and ODE are anticipating increased resources
with the enactment of the Student Success Act, although this will likely
not be enough to fully fund special education in Oregon. (pg. 11)
4. Rural districts compete with larger, urban school districts for special
education teachers and educational aides. Rural districts also have
limited access to specialists and more severe shortages of primary care
and child care providers, who assist with the identification of children
experiencing disabilities. (pg. 10)
5. EI/ECSE programs benefit from the use of a statewide case management
data system to coordinate services. No such data system exists for special
education programs for school-age children in grades K-12. (pg. 12)
What We Recommend
We made 13 recommendations to ODE about improving coordination and
monitoring of services for students experiencing disabilities.
ODE agreed with six of our recommendations, partially agreed with three,
and disagreed with four. Their response can be found at the end of the report.
Why This Audit is
Important
» For the 2018-19 school
year, over 80,000 children in
kindergarten through the 12th
grade were identified by the
Oregon Department of
Education (ODE) as students
experiencing disabilities.
» Children who receive
appropriate services for their
disabilities, such as
individualized instruction,
have better academic and life
outcomes.
» ODE and school districts are
subject to federal laws that
prohibit discrimination on the
basis of disability and protect
the rights of students and
their families.
» The federal Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA) requires that students
experiencing disabilities
receive a free, appropriate
public education in the least
restrictive environment.
» Disabilities covered under
IDEA include developmental
delays, hearing and visual
impairments, emotional
disturbance, orthopedic
impairments, autism, traumatic
brain injury, other health
impairments, and specific
learning disabilities.
The Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division is an independent, nonpartisan organization that conducts audits based on
objective, reliable information to help state government operate more efficiently and effectively. The summary above should be
considered in connection with a careful review of the full report.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 1
Introduction
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) was established on the principle
that disability is a natural part of the human experience and in no way diminishes the right of an
individual to participate in or contribute to society. IDEA states that all students experiencing
disabilities have the right to receive a free, appropriate public education in the least restrictive
environment.1 Similarly, the mission of the Oregon Department of Education (ODE) is to foster
equity and excellence for every learner, including students experiencing disabilities. Research
has shown that when these students receive appropriate interventions through special
education programs, they can achieve improved academic and life outcomes.
The purpose of this audit was to determine whether ODE and its Office of Enhancing Student
Opportunities, which oversees special education throughout the state, can better support
students experiencing disabilities, particularly as they transition from early childhood to school-
age programs.
Federal, state, and local government all play an important role in Oregon's
special education system
Improving special education requires coordinating among different layers of government and
the numerous agencies responsible for different parts of the special education system. The
federal government establishes national standards for special education and oversees state
compliance with those standards. State educational agencies, such as ODE, set additional special
education policies and oversee the contractors and local governments who provide services
directly to students. In Oregon, these contractors and local government agencies include school
districts, education service districts, grant-funded programs, and other regional and local special
education service providers.
1 The term free, appropriate education refers to education provided at public expense that meets the standards of the state education
agency and that is tailored to the individual needs of the student. The term least restrictive environment means that children with
disabilities should spend as much time as possible with their peers who do not receive special education.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 2
The federal government sets special education standards and requirements for both state
and local educational agencies
The federal government plays a significant role in efforts to improve services for children
experiencing disabilities through its anti-discrimination laws, large grants, and oversight of state
education agencies. The Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP) within the U.S.
Department of Education is the main body overseeing state special education programs.
IDEA, as amended in 2004, is the primary federal education law that regulates special education.
The act is designed to improve the identification of children experiencing disabilities. This
includes requiring states to monitor local school districts to prevent the overidentification or
disproportionate representation by race and ethnicity of children as children with disabilities.
The act also seeks to improve the delivery of services by local education agencies and providers,
and the collection, analysis, and accurate reporting of data. One section of IDEA addresses early
childhood special education services for children ages three through five, as well as services for
school-age children in grades K-12. Another part addresses early intervention services for
children from birth through age two.
IDEA also specifically addresses the coordination of special education services. The law requires
states to have interagency agreements in place, as well as policies and procedures, with local
public educational agencies to guarantee services are coordinated. For example, local
educational agencies must ensure the linkage of records pertaining to migrant children for the
purpose of electronically exchanging, among states, health and educational information. Schools
are also required to take reasonable steps to promptly obtain, and respond to, requests for a
child’s school records.
OSEP’s Monitoring and State Improvement Planning Division is responsible for ensuring
states' compliance with IDEA, which requires states to submit the annual State Performance
Plan/Annual Performance Report. OSEP uses these reports to ensure that states and other public
agencies are implementing programs designed to improve results for infants, toddlers, children,
and youth with disabilities.
Other federal acts related to disabilities include the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of disability in programs that receive federal financial assistance, and
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), which prohibits discrimination on the basis
of disability by all public programs.
Oregon state government sets policies and oversees provision of special education services
The Governor, state legislators, and the State Board of Education set policies and agendas for
education in Oregon, including special education and other services for students experiencing
disabilities. The Governor is Oregon’s Superintendent of Public Instruction and appoints the
Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction to lead ODE. State legislators approve the state's
education budget, among other fiscal duties related to education. Through the bills they pass and
grants they approve, legislators also send important signals about what they expect from
schools, districts, and state-level education officials regarding special education. The State
Board of Education sets educational policies and standards for Oregon public schools. The
board is made up of seven voting members appointed by the Governor and approved by the
state Senate.
ODE administers and monitors contracts and grants, provides technical assistance to local
education bodies, and plays an important statewide leadership role in education policy. The
agency is also charged with ensuring that school districts comply with laws and rules, collecting
and evaluating student performance information from districts and schools, and reporting
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 3
outcomes to the public and the federal government. The offices within ODE primarily
responsible for these functions in the areas of special education are the Office of Enhancing
Student Opportunities and the Early Learning Division.
• The Office of Enhancing Student Opportunities works to ensure that young children
and students experiencing disabilities receive an appropriate education in the least
restrictive environment. The primary liaisons between this office and the local education
agencies that directly provide special education services are county contacts — ODE
personnel who ensure compliance with laws, provide technical assistance, and fulfill
other support roles for Oregon's districts.
• The Early Learning Division administers preschool and other learning programs, and
oversees child care provider licensing, subsidies, and training throughout the state.
Although administratively part of ODE, the Early Learning Division is governed by the
Early Learning Council, which is charged with coordinating a unified and aligned
system of early learning in Oregon for the purpose of ensuring that children, including
those experiencing disabilities, enter school ready to learn. The council was created
through Senate Bill 909 in 2011 and its nine members are appointed by the Governor.
School districts, Education Service Districts, and other local subcontractors provide special
education services
Oregon’s 197 school districts and their elected boards are responsible for governing their
schools consistent with State Board of Education policies. Oregon’s 19 Education Service
Districts (ESDs) and their elected boards assist local school districts in their designated regions
with various efforts, especially specialized professional and administrative services that local
districts might not have the capacity to provide on their own.
Figure 1: Every Oregon county is associated with one of 19 ESDs
Source: The Oregon Association of Education Service Districts
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 4
School districts and ESDs provide local and regional special education services under ODE
oversight. Districts and ESDs can subcontract with other service providers if they need
additional special education staffing or expertise. Such subcontractors include community child
care providers, teachers, and other professionals who specialize in providing interventions for
specific disabilities, such as speech and language pathologists, audiologists, and psychologists.
Special education services in Oregon are delivered through three main types
of programs for young children and for students in grades K-12
School-age programs serve students experiencing disabilities from age five to 21 years. These
services are primarily provided by local K-12 public schools and districts, which are overseen by
ODE in accordance with federal and state standards, including IDEA. By law, an Individualized
Education Program (IEP) must be developed by teachers, parents or other legal guardians, and
other school personnel for every student identified as experiencing a disability in one or more of
several disability categories. An IEP is a written statement that presents the educational goals
for the student and the services that will be provided to meet those goals.
Early Intervention (EI) programs, as the name suggests, provide both individually designed
services for children from birth to three years of age as well as support for their families. These
programs are intended to enhance the child’s physical, cognitive, communication, social,
emotional, and adaptive development.
Much like the individual plan required for students in school-age programs, EI service providers
are required to develop an Individualized Family Service Plan, which is a written statement that
presents learning goals for a child and the services that child will receive to meet those goals.
These services are overseen by ODE, provided by regional contractors or their subcontractors,
and delivered in a variety of settings such as classrooms, community child care, preschools, and
in-home visits.
Early Childhood Special Education (ECSE) is instruction for children experiencing disabilities
ages three to the age of public school eligibility in the areas of communication development,
social or emotional development, physical development, including vision and hearing, adaptive
development, and cognitive development. ECSE instruction is provided in hospitals, institutions,
special schools, classrooms, and community child care or preschool settings, as well as through
home visits.
As with school-age services, students identified for ECSE services are required by IDEA to have
an IEP. However, as part of a seamless system of free services for young children, Oregon uses a
single Individualized Family Service Plan that combines required federal content for both EI and
ECSE programs.
ECSE services are provided by regional agencies that contract with ODE. These agencies are
overseen by teams within ODE's Office of Enhancing Student Opportunities. In Oregon, both EI
and ECSE services within a region are provided by the same contracting agency. As of 2019,
these agencies consisted of eight ESDs and one school district.
Although they were not within the scope of this audit, several additional programs also serve
Oregon's students experiencing disabilities. These include Regional Programs, which provide
specialized services for children with low-incidence, high need disabilities, such as traumatic
brain injury. These services include Braille and sign language instruction, assistive technology,
2 The nine EI/ECSE contractors in 2019 were NW Regional ESD, Clackamas ESD, Willamette ESD, Linn-Benton-Lincoln ESD, Lane
ESD, David Douglas School District, InterMountain ESD, High Desert ESD, and Douglas ESD.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 5
audiology, and physical therapy, all of which are generally not available through school districts
or EI/ECSE programs.
Programs funded primarily by grants and legislatively mandated carve-outs from the State
School Fund also play a role in the Oregon special education system. These include Early Head
Start programs, Preschool Promise programs, and Oregon's 16 Early Learning Hubs, all of
which are avenues through which children in need of special education services can be
identified. Early Learning Hubs are monitored by ODE's Early Learning Division and serve
primarily as coordinators of health care, social, education, and other regional public- and
private-sector services. The hubs are tasked with producing better outcomes for children from
birth to six years of age and increasing kindergarten readiness for at-risk children.
Oregon has a significant number of children experiencing disabilities
Statewide, over 78,000 children in kindergarten through the 12th grade, or 13.5% of all Oregon
K-12 students, were identified by local service providers as students experiencing disabilities for
the 2017-18 school year. In 2018-19, this number grew to over 80,000 (13.8%) of all K-12
students. Among school districts with more than 10 students, the rate of students identified as
students experiencing disabilities ranged from zero to 25%.
As shown in Figure 4, learning disabilities and communication disorders are the most common
types of disabilities, with over 55% of Oregon's K-12 students who receive special education
services falling in these categories. In 2017-18, 12,402 children received EI/ECSE services. Over
51% of these youth experienced developmental delays, while 34% received services for
communication disorders.
Figure 4: A significant number of Oregon youth received K-12 special education and EI/ECSE services in the
2017-18 school year for different types of disabilities
Category Number enrolled Percentage of total
Total K-12 Special Education Students 78,220 13.5%
Total K-12 Students 578,079
Learning Disability 25,229 32.3%
Communication Disorder 18,250 23.3%
Other Health Impairment 13,940 17.8%
Autism Spectrum Disorder 9,687 12.4%
Emotional Disturbance 4,954 6.3%
Intellectual Disability 4,119 5.3%
Other Physical Impairment 2,041 2.6%
Children Receiving EI/ECSE Services 12,402
Communication Disorder 4,257 34.3%
Developmental Delay, 0-2 Years 3,744 30.2%
Developmental Delay, 3-4 Years 2,643 21.3%
Autism Spectrum Disorder 789 6.4%
Other Impairment 382 3.1%
Hearing Impairment 356 2.9%
Orthopedic Impairment 231 1.9%
Source: ODE
Children experiencing disabilities in Oregon receive services in a variety of settings; see Figure 5.
Consistent with the principle embedded in IDEA that education should be provided in the least
restrictive environment, over 74% of Oregon's K-12 students experiencing disabilities received
80% or more of their instruction in regular, general education classrooms in 2017-18. Similarly,
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 6
43% of children receiving EI/ECSE services were placed in programs for typically developing
children, and 37% received services at home from visiting specialists.
Figure 5: Oregon youth experiencing disabilities received K-12 special education and EI/ECSE services through
different placements and instructional environments in the 2017-18 school year
Category Number enrolled Percentage of total
K-12 Special Education Students 78,220
Regular Classrooms 80%+ 58,187 74.4%
Regular Classrooms 40%-79% 10,858 13.9%
Regular Classrooms <40% 7,772 9.9%
Other 1,403 1.8%
Children Receiving EI/ECSE Services 12,402
Program for Typically Developing Children 5,431 43.8%
Home 4,600 37.1%
Program for Children with Delay or Disability 2,187 17.6%
Service Provider Location 167 1.3%
Other Educational Environments and Residential Facilities 17 0.1%
Source: ODE
Robust stakeholder coordination is required to effectively identify children needing special
education services and ensure the transition from early childhood to kindergarten
Before a child receives EI/ECSE or school-age special education services, providers or other
stakeholders must identify their need for those services. While service providers and other
stakeholders often identify children in need, in Oregon, school districts are ultimately
responsible for identifying both K-12 students and children below the age of compulsory school
attendance who are not yet enrolled in public or private school programs.
Parents or guardians, relatives, and child care providers often initially recognize the need for
special education services in young children and refer them for further evaluation. Preschool
programs, such as Head Start and Preschool Promise, and primary care visits are also common
avenues for referrals. Local referral and evaluation agencies are then responsible for
determining whether the referred child is eligible for services. Once a child is found to be eligible
for services, the providers and parents work together to develop an Individualized Family
Service Plan to guide the services the child will receive.
The initial identification of children who are eligible to receive school-age special education
services may occur in early childhood before they begin school, but it may also occur later, such
as when the child begins kindergarten or at any time throughout their K-12 education. Once a
child is identified, special education personnel, the child (as appropriate), and the child’s parents
or guardians, among others, develop an IEP to guide the services the child will receive. This plan
is re-evaluated annually until the child no longer needs, or ages out of, school-age services.
Over time, a child may lose or gain eligibility for special education services. That is, a child’s
disability may resolve with interventions or their disability may manifest as they grow older and
are introduced to new skills. Regardless of how they are originally identified, children who
previously received services may, in some circumstances, need to be re-identified. This can
occur, for example, if they move into a new school district and their previous Individualized
Family Service Plan or IEP records were not available.
If a child who received EI/ECSE services needs to continue services once they enter
kindergarten, state guidelines require the EI/ECSE contractor to work with the school district
and personnel at the child’s school to facilitate the transition to school-age services. This process
consists of at least one meeting between EI/ECSE providers and district personnel, and may
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 7
begin over a year in advance of the child's entry into kindergarten. The school district may then
provide services to the child directly, or the child may receive services from the ESD serving the
region. In some cases, the ESD that served as the provider for the child's EI/ECSE services may
not be the same that provides school-age services.
Special education funding is primarily provided through the State School Fund
and is supplemented with state and federal grants
In Oregon, general state support for school districts and ESDs comes from the State School Fund,
which totaled $8.2 billion for the 2017-19 biennium. That figure includes $7.6 billion from the
state’s General Fund, which receives most of Oregon’s income tax revenue. Money for schools
also comes from local property taxes, totaling about $3.84 billion in 2017-19, and from both
federal and state grant funds. State grants were expected to total roughly $450 million in the
2017-19 biennium, while federal grants passed through ODE were projected to top $1.2 billion.
In addition to general school funding, special education services receive additional funds. For the
2017-19 school year, carve-outs from the State School Fund and state grants especially
designated for special education services totaled more than $650 million. Despite this additional
funding, K-12 special education in Oregon is still substantially funded by State School Fund
monies and local revenue. Both special and general education funds are distributed to districts
and ESDs through a formula based on student enrollment, where children with disabilities are
counted double for the purpose of allocating the available funds. That is, schools receive twice
the per-student allocation of funds for enrolled special education students.
There is a limit, however. The school funding formula's double-weight can only be applied to up
to 11% of a district’s student population. Yet more than 80% of Oregon's school districts have
identified more than 11% of their students as eligible to receive special education services in
each school year since at least 2011-12. These districts can apply to ODE for additional funds to
offset a portion of the extra costs to serve their students. ODE has worked to make this "cap
waiver" process easier for districts than it has been in the past. Despite the cap waiver, districts
can be left to cover at least part of the difference, and may need to use their general education
budget to do so.
Many special education services are provided by contractors who enter into legal agreements
with ODE. Before the funds for services are released and paid to the providers, these legal
agreements must be renewed by ODE. In recent years, this contract and grant agreement
renewal process has been subject to delays, with impacts at the state, regional, and local levels of
Oregon's education funding system.
A federal class-action lawsuit affected the audit scope
In January 2019, a federal class-action lawsuit naming ODE as a co-defendant was filed in
Oregon U.S. District Court. The lawsuit was filed by Disability Rights Oregon, families, and other
disability advocates, who alleged that ODE and its co-defendants violated federal laws by
improperly limiting instruction time for children with disabilities.
Although issues of instruction time are tangentially related to our audit, we took care to limit our
scope and did not focus our analysis or recommendations on this issue to avoid a conflict with
the lawsuit.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 8
The COVID-19 pandemic will have significant short- and long-term effects on Oregon's
education system and ODE’s ability to address issues identified in this audit report
Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted Oregon's education
system at all levels. The Governor ordered the closure of all K-12 schools beginning March 16,
consistent with mitigation strategies recommended by the Oregon Health Authority and the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
In addition to disruptions directly caused by school closures, other critical special and general
education services for both school-age students and children birth through age five have been
significantly impacted. These include child care services and the collection of education data.
The economic impacts of COVID-19 on the state and national economies are predicted to include
significant reductions in the education budgets at the local, regional, and statewide levels in
Oregon for the 2019-21 biennium and extending into the 2021-23 biennium.
The majority of our audit work was completed before school closures and other immediate
impacts of COVID-19 began to take effect. However, the Audits Division recognizes the
substantial challenges imposed by the pandemic on Oregon's education system and on ODE's
ability to respond to this report's findings and recommendations. We also acknowledge the
effects of the pandemic in Oregon continue to change rapidly and are not possible to predict with
certainty at the time of this report. Although we did not take COVID-19 into consideration when
performing our analysis and developing findings, we recognize that ODE's response to our
recommendations will be influenced by the current circumstances.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 9
Audit Results
ODE is responsible for ensuring that Oregon children with disabilities get the supports they need
to receive a full and equitable education. The agency works with local school districts, ESDs, and
others on the front lines of the educational system to fulfill this responsibility. Yet children in
some parts of the state are not receiving adequate services or experience gaps in services, in
part, because ODE lacks a strategic plan to guide decision-making around the use of special
education resources. This is particularly important because these resources are sparse across
the state. Children with disabilities who do not receive adequate services may have difficulties
realizing their educational and life potential.
Children experiencing disabilities are not consistently receiving the access to
services and supports they are entitled to and need
Increasing caseloads and staffing challenges have led to a situation in which special education
providers in most Oregon counties can only provide limited early childhood services in a timely
fashion; these services generally do not meet ODE’s standards of adequacy to address children’s
needs. Specifically, children receive less than the recommended number of weekly or monthly
visits from specialists. Additional factors hindering the adequate provision of services include
the unequal distribution of teaching, health care, and child care resources between urban and
rural areas of the state and limited flexibility in special education funding.
Children experiencing disabilities lack sufficient access to necessary supports due, in part,
to rising caseloads and inadequate and unpredictable funding
Many districts have difficulty meeting their special education needs because of high caseloads
and limited funding. Administrators from six of the eight school districts we visited, which are
served by different ESDs, said they are not able to provide adequate special education services
with existing resources to all school-age children identified as eligible. Personnel from a seventh
district said they could use more resources to provide adequate services.
EI/ECSE caseloads increased every year between September 2014 (approximately 9,000
children) and September 2018 (over 11,000 children). The EI/ECSE monthly counts for the
2017-18 school year ranged from over 10,000 in September to over 15,000 in August. Three of
the nine ESD providers we spoke to described high or increasing caseloads as a barrier to
providing adequate services, and two of these providers described this challenge specifically
with regard to students experiencing high-cost, low-incidence disabilities. Four additional ESD
providers described funding as a barrier.
For early childhood, ODE developed a model to determine what constitutes an adequate level of
services according to whether a child has high, moderate, or low needs. From 2018-19, only
33.4% of children eligible for EI/ECSE services received the recommended specialized
consultation services at least one time per week; 39.1% for
EI and 31.2% for ECSE. We also found this percentage varied
depending on the severity of the child’s needs. For instance,
for children eligible for ECSE services with low needs, 61.6%
received what ODE defined as an adequate level of services.
Yet as the need increases, this percentage decreases — only
6.2% and 0.7% of children with moderate and high needs,
respectively, received an adequate level of services.
Children do not receive adequate
levels of service
Only 6.2% of children with
moderate needs, and 0.7% with
high needs, received an adequate
level of services in 2018-19.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 10
Figure 7: EI/ECSE adequate service levels vary by the severity of need
Early Intervention Adequate Service Level Actual Service Level % of
children
Services for infants and toddlers
(typically home-based)
Specialized consultation
services with caregivers: Once
per week
1,526 children received
this level of service out of
3,899 eligible children
39.1%
Early Childhood Special
Education: Level of Need Adequate Service Level Actual Service Level % of
children
Low Need: Delayed in 1-2 areas of
development
Specialized ECSE services:
Once per week
2,939 children received
this level of service out of
4,768 eligible children
61.6%
Moderate Need: Delayed in 3-4
areas of development
Preschool: 12 hours per week
Specialized consultation:
Once per week
Parent education:
Once per month
205 children received this
level of service out of
3,305 eligible children
6.2%
High need: Delayed in most or all
areas of development
Preschool: 15 hours per week
Specialized consultation:
Once per week
Parent education:
Once per month
14 children received this
level of service out of
2,047 eligible children
0.7%
Source: ODE, EI/ECSE Adequate Service Level Model update April 2019
ODE’s adequate service model is framed largely around the amount of time that specialists
spend with children and families. We found a lack of available education personnel adversely
affects this necessary time.
ESD and school district administrators report difficulties in hiring and retaining special
education personnel. Seven of the eight school districts we spoke with said they were not able to
provide adequate services because they lack staff. Some ESD and school district administrators
reported that the challenges they face when children transition from EI/ECSE services to
elementary school often result from a lack of staff time to help facilitate the transition.
Statewide, in 2018-19, the turnover rate for all teachers not
returning, for any reason, to the district in which they taught the
prior year was 13.7%. For special education teachers, this rate
was 20.4%. In response to these challenges, school districts take
extra steps to support or recruit special education teachers,
including starting the recruitment process early and assisting
general education teachers to switch to special education.
The lack of special education teachers, and whether they are
sufficiently trained, also likely affects the efficient use of special education resources. IDEA
requires states to monitor the disproportionate representation, by race and ethnicity, of children
as children with disabilities. Administrators from four school districts with significant minority
populations told us that it can be challenging to separate a child’s need for special education
services from other challenges, such as limited English proficiency or trauma. Special education
personnel also told us of the limited time or support for professional training.
The federal government postponed compliance with the disproportionate representation
regulation until July 2020, at which time ODE will begin monitoring 3- to 5-year-olds and will
then add kindergarteners. Providing teachers with enough time for professional development on
Turnover is higher among
special education teachers
In 2019-19, the statewide
turnover rate for all teachers
was 13.7%. For special
education teachers, the rate
was 20.4%.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 11
topics such as culturally-competent means of pre-referral identification would not only help
reduce disproportionate representation, but would also aid in positively redirecting school
districts’ limited resources.
Rural areas of the state encounter additional challenges in providing required services to
children experiencing disabilities. Rural districts face substantial challenges concerning the
availability of special education teachers and other professionals, which is limited even in urban
areas of the state. Rural districts must compete with larger urban areas that can sometimes offer
higher salaries, better benefits, and lower caseloads. Two administrators also told us about how
young graduates do not want to stay in rural areas.
Not only is it challenging for children experiencing disabilities in rural areas to obtain services,
districts in rural areas struggle with a shortage of professionals who can help them identify
children in need of services. EI/ECSE contractors rely on community partners who work with
young children to identify who might be eligible for services and refer them for evaluation.
These partners include primary care providers and child care providers. Yet many rural parts of
the state do not have enough primary care providers and child care providers to meet the
demand for their services, resulting in potentially missed opportunities for some children to be
evaluated and referred early for services.
Furthermore, many parts of the state are considered “child care deserts,” which are communities
with more than three children for every regulated child care slot. Just 21% of children age five
and under have access to a regulated child care slot, including 12% of infants and toddlers and
29% of preschool-age children. The percentage of all children age five and under with access to a
regulated child care slot is slightly higher in metropolitan than nonmetropolitan counties —
21% compared to 18%.
Reynolds School District: Staff turnover
Reynolds School District is a minority-majority
urban district that, as of October 2019, had
experienced a 22% turnover in special education
staff from the 2018-19 school year. One of its
elementary schools has had five special education
teachers in seven years. This turnover leaves them
without enough time or people to train new hires,
attend transition meetings or develop
professionally, and their students are not able to
form the kinds of relationships with staff that can
support success.
Powers School District: Rural isolation
Powers School District has a total enrollment of
123 students and is geographically isolated
within Coos County. The district does not have
transportation for its special education students
and must refer them to cities on the coast for
services. Coos Bay is an hour’s drive away.
Sometimes, families move to other school
districts rather than travel regularly to the
nearest service providers.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 12
In parts of the state that experience both a lack of primary care physicians and available child
care openings, more of the responsibility to identify children falls on EI/ECSE contractors.
ODE is aware of the child care and health care issues, but the agency monitors IDEA compliance
and procedural safeguards, not specific challenges related to these issues faced by contractors
providing EI/ECSE and school-age services. Doing so would show the agency where contractors
need additional support. This information could then be used to develop a plan of action to
address the challenges.
Figure 8: Percent of Oregon young children with access to regulated child care slots by age as of January 2018
Source: Pratt, Sektnan, Weber. January 2019. Oregon’s Child Care Deserts, Oregon State University, College of Public Health and Human
Sciences.
While school districts receive additional state funding for students experiencing disabilities,
these monies do not fully mitigate the funding challenges. Federal funding for special education
has been less than half of the federal share defined in 1981. This translated into a $267 million
funding gap for Oregon for the 2019-20 school year. In addition, we found the number of
students experiencing disabilities exceeds the state’s funding formula cap of 11% for special
education services. While ODE provides extra funds beyond this double-weight through a cap
waiver for districts that exceed the 11% cap, for the 2017-18 school year, the state was only able
to provide about a third of the total dollars needed to fully fund the cap waivers.
Funding has never been sufficient to meet the level of adequacy called for in ODE’s EI/ECSE
service model since the time it was first developed. Seven of the nine EI/ECSE providers told us
that a lack of funding was a barrier to providing adequate services. Districts sometimes use
funds from their general education budgets to cover the remaining costs. ODE staff, and many of
the ESD administrators we spoke to, expect the Early Learning Account of the Student Success
Act to provide enough funding to get close to, if not reach, current adequate service levels for
children receiving EI/ECSE services although growing caseloads may result in a continued gap.3
Staffing challenges are exacerbated by the sometimes unpredictable release of education funds.
Many ESD administrators told us of problems related to not receiving their contracts from ODE
in a timely fashion. This has created uncertainty about how many personnel ESDs would be able
3 The Student Success Act (HB 3427) was signed into law on May 20, 2019. When passed, the act was expected to infuse $2 billion
into Oregon’s educational system every two years. A portion of the funds will go into the State School Fund, while the remaining will
fund three additional accounts: the Early Learning Account, the Student Investment Account, and the Statewide Education Initiatives
Account. The Early Learning Account and the Student Investment Account will receive at least 20% and 50%, respectively, of the
remaining funds with up to 30% going to the Statewide Education Initiatives Account.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 13
to hire to provide EI/ECSE services for the coming year. Also, some ESDs were concerned they
might need to lay off staff after the 2019-20 school year, with the hope of re-hiring them in
2020-21, because funds from the Student Success Act were not going to be available until the
second year after the act’s initiation. However, ODE made additional General Fund resources
available for the 2019-20 school year to mitigate some of the impact of this delay.
While early childhood service providers benefit from a statewide case management
system, the state lacks such a system for school-age service providers
The structures that exist to serve children experiencing disabilities work better if children stay
in one school district for their entire educational experience. They break down, however, as
children move from one school district to another, whether that new district is adjacent to the
previous one or across the state. This risk is less pronounced in early childhood than for school-
age children because of the work ODE has done to streamline early childhood special education
services.
Oregon uses a single program to support children in both EI and ECSE services. As a result, the
Individualized Family Services Plan case information is now maintained in a single, statewide
data system called ecWeb. In this system, each child is assigned to a contractor. Authorized
users, such as a specialist working with the child, can access the system from anywhere in the
state to update the child’s record. The system is housed at the University of Oregon and funds for
EI/ECSE support the system. Because of this single, statewide data system, providers who serve
a child who moves from one part of the state to another will be able to easily access a record of
that child’s needs and supports.
No such unified system exists for the school-age system. Instead, limited IEP information for
school-age children is stored in separate record-keeping systems maintained by six information
system contractors for all of Oregon’s school districts.
Because there is no statewide data system that contains and transfers information about
eligibility and services provided to school-age children, districts are responsible for creating and
maintaining their own data on these children and transferring that information, as necessary,
when children enter or leave their district, which can result in delays. If a new school district is
not made aware of an incoming child’s support needs, they may need to re-identify a child for
eligibility after the teachers have had an opportunity to work with them, creating unnecessary
gaps in the supports the child receives.
The process to transition a child from ECSE services into kindergarten is regionally focused and
lacks a data system. The EI/ECSE contractor sends lists to the school districts in their area
letting them know about children who are expected to enter their districts the following school
year and are in need of special education services. If a child moves to a school district outside of
the contractor’s area of support, however, the new district may not receive the child’s
information, particularly if, for example, the contractor was not aware of the family’s intent to
move.
In the year prior to kindergarten, contractors invite staff from the school districts to attend
meetings so the district staff can meet the families and become familiar with the needs of the
children they will be serving. However, school districts that are not able to send staff, because
they do not have the capacity to make the staff time available, are unable to take advantage of
these meetings.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 14
ODE should take additional strategic action to better ensure the needs of
students experiencing disabilities are met to the greatest extent possible
Like other states, Oregon is required by the federal government to ensure that students
experiencing disabilities have access to a free, appropriate public education. With an expected
infusion of funding from the passage of the Student Success Act, and with decisions being made
at the local level about how to direct these funds, ODE can do more, strategically, to ensure that
competing needs across the state are met.
Broader strategic action could help address statewide challenges in delivering special
education services
ODE is already familiar with the concept and benefits offered by strategic plans. ODE currently
has an agencywide strategic plan, as well as one for the Early Learning Division. Oregon’s State
Systemic Improvement Plans (SSIP) for IDEA Part B and Part C serve as ODE’s strategic plans for
special education; these are included in the State Performance Plan/Annual Performance Report
submitted each year to OSEP.
Each SSIP has a specific focus. The one for Part B is about implementing a multi-tiered system of
support4 in elementary schools to improve reading levels among third grade students
experiencing disabilities. The SSIP for Part C is about social-emotional learning skills for young
children. Each plan talks about technical assistance, financial support, stakeholder involvement,
and professional development for its specific topic.
The plans’ strategies, however, do not address broader service deficiencies across the special
education landscape. Deficiencies identified by this audit are:
• The limited pool of special education educators and service providers from which to
recruit;
• Pay and caseload imbalances across the state that impede the retention of educators and
service providers, particularly in rural areas;
• The specific challenges facing early childhood and school-age contractors that result
from the unequal distribution of resources across the state, such as primary health care
and child care;
• Restricted time for professional development, especially on the topic of culturally
competent means of pre-referral identification and evaluation of students in need of
special education services;
• Uncertain deadlines around the release of special education funds, which hinder
contractors’ ability to plan for upcoming school years;
• The lack of a statewide data system for the school-age special education program; and
• Limited planning around targeting Student Success Act funds to address known
shortfalls in current special education service levels throughout the state.
4 A Multi-Tiered System of Support (MTSS) is a data-driven, problem-solving framework to improve education outcomes for all
students. Schools apply this model as a way to align academic, behavioral, social, and emotional supports. Schools provide Tier 1
(Universal Prevention) supports to all students. Tier 2 (Targeted Prevention) supports are directed at students with similar needs.
Tier 3 (Intensive, Individual Prevention) support typically relies on formal assessments to determine a student’s needs and to
develop an individualized support plan.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 15
ODE should look to other states like Texas and Delaware as models and link its special
education strategic plans to other ODE plans and efforts
Like Oregon, Texas and Delaware also submit the required State Performance Plan/Annual
Performance Reports to OSEP. These states, however, have strategic plans that address service
deficiencies more broadly.
The Texas Education Agency developed a strategic plan to address the
underperformance of it special education students in reading and math, as well
as corrections required by the U.S. Department of Education. The plan sought
to balance compliance with federal regulations with a results-driven focus on
student outcomes. Primary areas of focus for the Texas plan include
monitoring, identification and evaluation, and training and development. The
Texas plan contains minimal additional requirements for local school systems
outside of what is already expected of them by IDEA and state statute and the state’s progress in
completing the plan’s activities is made public on the agency’s special education website.
In 2015, the Delaware General Assembly authorized its Department of Education
to perform a comprehensive, annual review of the delivery of special education
services within the public school system. A full-time position was established to
coordinate this review and the creation of a special education services strategic
plan. Delaware’s goal for the initiative was to address the delivery of special
education within the state through a review of existing evidence. The state
identified seven areas of need for the plan: students, staff/partners, delivery
structures, parents/families, resources, policy/regulations, and community. Goals, strategies,
and metrics were developed for each of these areas.
ODE should tie strategies within its special education strategic plans to those in other ODE plans,
as appropriate, to better coordinate resources and efforts across divisions and programs. For
example, the following strategies in the Early Learning Division’s 2019-23 Early Learning
System Plan already touch upon issues we identified in this audit.
• Strategy 2.2: Expand access to, and build the supply of, high-quality (culturally
responsive, inclusive, developmentally appropriate) affordable preschool that meets the
needs of families;
• Strategy 4.4: Strengthen the coordination among early care and education, health, and
housing to promote health and safety for young children; and
• Strategy 5.1: Ensure adequate funding of and access to a range of regional and
community-based services, including Early Intervention/Early Childhood Special
Education services.
ODE could also leverage its EI/ECSE model of adequate services for children aged birth through
public school eligibility when developing strategies and goals for school-age children. ODE has
done substantial work on this model, which is based on the high, medium, or low needs of
eligible children. While the state has not yet reached the level of adequacy described in the
model, the model identifies gaps in services. ODE could use this model to highlight those parts of
the state that are more successful at delivering EI/ECSE services adequately and then direct
resources to support less successful parts of the state with technical assistance, best practices,
and strategic guidance.
5 https://tea.texas.gov/academics/special-student-populations/special-education
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 16
The development of a similar model for school-age special education services would allow ODE
to quantify how different parts of the state are affected by challenges providing services to the
school-age population. ODE could, again, then help to allocate resources accordingly.
Lastly, ODE should look to federal law for standards that need to be incorporated into a special
education strategic plan. For example, the Head Start Act states that not less than 10% of the
total number of children enrolled in Head Start programs will be children with disabilities. This
act also requires reviews to ensure that this enrollment requirement is met. IDEA encourages
states to train personnel to work in rural areas and to support families of children experiencing
disabilities who may have limited access to services due to economic, cultural, or language
barriers.
Children and schools have poorer outcomes when the needs of children
experiencing disabilities are not addressed
Children who receive services to support their disabilities, particularly in early grades, will
benefit from that support throughout their academic careers. Access to services is necessary if
the state intends for all students, including students experiencing disabilities, to meet academic
proficiency and high school graduation goals. Services also support the social and psychological
well-being of students experiencing disabilities.
Students are not able to take full advantage of educational opportunities if they cannot
access the supports for which they are eligible
In its K-12 literacy framework, adopted in 2009, the State Board of Education describes the
importance of a child’s ability to read by third grade. The board notes that students who are not
successful readers in third grade will have more difficulty directing their academic attention on
developing reading comprehension strategies or on using their reading skills to develop subject-
area knowledge. After third grade, the odds are against these students becoming grade-level
readers without intense intervention. What actions schools take to teach children to read in the
early years of their education greatly matters.
Oregon’s plan to meet federal education standards
describes a goal that at least 80% of students, including
those experiencing disabilities, score proficient on both
the English language arts and mathematics portions of
the statewide summative exam by the 2024-25 school
year.
However, of the students in grades three through eight
and 11, only 22% of those experiencing disabilities
scored proficient in reading/language arts in the 2015-
16 school year, compared with 54% of all students. In mathematics, 18% of students
experiencing disabilities met proficiency compared to 43% of all students. In order to meet the
goal of 80% proficiency, students experiencing disabilities will need to make more progress than
their non-disabled peers; to do that, they will need supports for their disabilities.
Oregon’s goal for graduation rates follows a similar story. In the 2015-16 school year, the four-
year graduation rate was 74% for all students and 53% for students experiencing disabilities.
The 2024-25 goal is a 90% graduation rate, for students experiencing disabilities as well as for
students overall.
Special education services help children access the education they are entitled to receive by
enlarging the capacity of the system to serve the educational needs of all children. Services can
Students with disabilities fall behind in
proficiency goals
In the 2015-16 school year, 54% of all
students scored proficient in
reading/language arts, but only 22% of
students experiencing disabilities were
proficient. In math, 43% of all students
were proficient, while only 18% of
students experiencing disabilities were.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 17
support the needs of children experiencing disabilities directly by providing academic
instruction tailored to accommodate the child’s specific academic needs, and indirectly, by
supporting all children’s socio-emotional learning needs, reducing classroom isolation,
promoting successes that reduce frustration and anxiety, and keeping children engaged with
school as a result.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 18
Recommendations
The audit team collected and analyzed data and documentation, conducted interviews, and
visited schools and school districts before and during fall 2019. This report was going through
final revisions when the state of Oregon and ODE were first impacted by concerns about COVID-
19. Due to this timing, our recommendations were developed largely without consideration for
the public health and economic impacts of the pandemic, and we anticipate that ODE will
respond to them knowing that there may be other, more pressing concerns that they consider a
higher priority.
In order to improve special education services statewide, ODE should:
1. Develop and document a strategic plan for special education services statewide that sets
specific expectations for coordination and delivery of EI/ECSE and school-age special
education services, and informs decisions about where to direct additional supports or
resources.
In order to improve identification and delivery of services for children from birth to age five who
are eligible for EI/ECSE services, ODE should:
2. Provide additional technical assistance to EI/ECSE contractors so that they can expand
identification efforts in areas with child care and primary care shortages.
3. Document efforts to increase the number of children receiving ECSE services in high-
quality, inclusive early childhood placements in areas identified as child care deserts for
children age three through five.
4. Determine whether funds from all sources are sufficient to meet targets in the adequate
service model and report to the Legislature on any remaining gaps in funding to reach
that goal.
In order to determine whether children from historically underserved races or ethnicities are
under- or over-identified for EI services, ODE should:
5. Define a reference population to identify which regions are experiencing
disproportionality by race and ethnicity in both identification and delivery of EI/ECSE
services.
6. Identify data sets necessary to determine whether any EI/ECSE contractors are over- or
under-identifying children from historically underserved races or ethnicities.
In order to improve special education services delivered to school-age children experiencing
disabilities, ODE should:
7. Require EI/ECSE contractors to report to ODE on subcontractors’ coordination of the
transition of children receiving ECSE services into school-age programs, including
information about how many pre-kindergarten transition meetings are attended by
special education personnel who provide services to school-age children.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 19
8. Work with EI/ECSE contractors to monitor and improve subcontractors’ processes for
facilitating coordination of the transition of children receiving ECSE services into school
age programs.
9. Present the recommendations of this audit to the System of Care Advisory Council.6
10. Offer training or professional development on culturally competent pre-referral
identification techniques at times and locations that are accessible to school district
personnel throughout the state.
In order to support increased availability and retention of special education staff and specialists
providing services to school-age children, ODE should:
11. Determine which ESDs and school districts have the most difficulties hiring and retaining
special education staff and specialists.
12. Develop a plan to provide data, guidance, and resources to ESDs and school districts
based on the specific needs of their regions to improve retention of special education
staff and specialists (e.g., additional support for home-grown training programs and
additional financial incentives for harder-to-staff regions of the state).
In order to improve data sharing for the K-12 special education system, ODE should:
13. Begin the process to develop and implement a centralized statewide system for IEP
information, modeled after the existing Individualized Family Service Plan system
(ecWeb) by:
a. Reviewing the IEP systems already in use in the state.
b. Identifying the needs of the personnel who administer existing systems and the
needs of the districts who will use the new system.
c. Identifying the stakeholders who will participate in the initial rollout of a
centralized IEP system.
6 The System of Care Advisory Council was formed by Senate Bill 1 in 2019. The purpose of this council is to improve the
effectiveness and efficacy of state and local systems of care that provide services to youth by providing a centralized and impartial
forum for statewide policy development and planning.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 20
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
Objective
The objective of this audit was to determine how ODE can better support children experiencing
disabilities from early childhood education through early school-age programs.
Scope
The audit focused on the transition in special education services from early childhood to
kindergarten enrollment because of the importance of a child’s ability to read by the third grade.
We concluded that the following were not necessary to achieve the objectives of the audit and
we excluded from the scope: children in grades four and above; the use of seclusion and
restraint techniques; placement decisions regarding inclusive or specialized classrooms;
reduction in student instructional hours due to behavioral issues; adequacy of services at the
student level; and special education services in private schools and correctional facilities. To
avoid conflicts with the lawsuit brought against ODE and co-defendants, we also excluded issues
of instruction time and instruction environments.
Methodology
To address our objective, we used a methodology that included, but was not limited to:
conducting interviews, visiting schools, analyzing educational data, and reviewing
documentation.
Within ODE, we met with the Chief of Staff, assistant superintendents, the Director of the Office
of Student Services, the Government and Legal Affairs Manager, education program specialists,
EI/ECSE education specialists, operations and policy analysts, and the internal auditor. We also
conducted interviews with state legislators and an analyst from the Legislative Fiscal Office.
To learn about the views, opinions, and perspectives of stakeholders, we interviewed directors,
superintendents, principals, teachers, early childhood specialists, a special education
administrator, and a preschool transition coordinator who work in eight school districts and
nine education service districts from around the state. We also spoke with representatives from
Disability Rights Oregon, the Oregon School Boards Association, the Oregon Education
Association, the Oregon Association of Education Service Districts, and the University of
Oregon’s Early Childhood Cares program.
We reviewed federal laws, Oregon state laws, administrative rules, and previous audit reports
related to disability rights and special education. We also requested and analyzed education data
from ODE and conducted a reliability assessment on these data.
We did not examine national trends or data about special education from other states. While this
information can provide important contextual information, differences in eligibility criteria and
methods used to identify students for special education services made such comparisons
difficult to interpret and to translate into meaningful, practical recommendations that can be
acted upon by decision-makers in the Legislature and at ODE. Similarly, it was difficult to
identify "peer states" that outperform Oregon in educational outcomes yet possess similar
resources, demographics, and legislative environments. For these reasons, we determined that
insights gleaned from comparisons of Oregon to other states were likely to be of limited value.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 21
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We sincerely appreciate the courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of
ODE, education service districts, school districts, and other stakeholders during the course of
this audit.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-24 | June 2020 | Page 22
Appendix A: Sites selected for school district visits
Oregon achieves . . . together!
Colt Gill
Director of the Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
June 15, 2020
Kip Memmott, Director
Secretary of State, Audits Division
255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Salem, OR 97310
Dear Mr. Memmott,
This letter provides a written response to the Audits Division’s final draft audit report titled ODE Can
Better Support Students Experiencing Disabilities Through Improved Coordination and Monitoring of
Services.  Overall ODE agrees with many of the recommendations of this audit and will use the
recommendations to address issues raised by the auditors. Although ODE also disagrees with or only
partially agrees with some of the recommendations largely due to the impact on public education and
the state’s budget by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Over the last eight weeks our families and educators have faced extraordinary challenges to build on the
strengths and meet the needs of our state’s children during a global pandemic. Oregon’s education
professionals (including bus drivers, nutrition service staff, school office staff, translators, teachers,
school nurses, counselors, principals, district administrators, and so many more) have pulled off heroic
efforts to provide care, connection, and continuity of learning for our students. We responded in a crisis,
we have kept Oregon’s health care system from being overwhelmed, and we have saved lives through
slowing the spread of COVID-19. It has been stressful, challenging, and rewarding.
Additionally, COVID-19 has impacted Oregon’s economy in unprecedented ways. Based on the latest
Economic and Revenue Forecast dated June 2020, it is anticipated that the economic impacts of COVID-
19 will exist for 4-5 years. We also anticipate significant reductions in both state and school district
budgets brought on by revenue shortfalls in income tax revenues, lottery revenues and the corporate
activity tax.
Now we look forward to the coming school year. Governor Brown has begun the process of reopening
and building a safe and strong Oregon. This fall Oregon will begin a process to provide in-person
instruction in our schools again. However, we will still be living under the virus. Community-wide
immunity is many months off.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Accordingly, some of our responses to the auditors’ recommendations will be contextualized within the
current economic downturn. In addition, economic forecasting will force shifting priorities as ODE
continues to support schools and districts to deliver educational services to Oregon students during
pandemic lockdowns amidst economic losses.
On a final note, it is clear that ODE and Audits Division staff both value equitable delivery of educational
services for the population of students experiencing disabilities. In a few recommendations below, we
describe how federal mandates and local control policies in Oregon may alter how we achieve that goal
for our students. Below is our detailed response to each recommendation in the audit.
RECOMMENDATION 1
Develop and document a strategic plan for special education services statewide that sets
specific expectations for coordination and delivery of EI/ECSE and school-age special
education services, and informs decisions about where to direct additional supports or
resources.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Disagree
N/A N/A
Narrative for Recommendation 1
Generally, the Department agrees with the need for strategic planning to guide all Departmental efforts.
In fact, the Department has recently completed a strategic planning initiative that resulted in an equity
strategic plan to move its work forward.  However, the Department disagrees with any recommendation
that promotes separate educational experiences for students who experience disability, including the
current recommendation.
Students who experience a disability that makes them eligible for special education and related services
benefit first from the same core educational experiences available to all students. Special education
should supplement the general education experience by “adapting, as appropriate to the needs of an
eligible child . . . the content, methodology, or delivery of instruction—(i) To address the unique needs
of the child that result from the child’s disability; and (ii) To ensure access of the child to the general
curriculum, so that the child can meet the educational standards within the jurisdiction of the public
agency that apply to all children” (Special Education, 2017).
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Further, “the preponderance of research supports inclusive education” (SWIFT Education Center, 2017).
Improving results for students who experience disability – the very purpose of the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act – is best done through intensifying the general education experience, not
through strategically planning a separate system.  Eradicating the segregation of students experiencing
disability is a core value held by the Oregon Department of Education.  Students who experience
disability leave the educational system to the same world as their peers without disabilities; they are
asked to apply the skills they learned in school alongside all others who have completed their
educational experience.  The more students who experience disability are provided separate instruction,
the more they are pulled out to special education exclusive services, even if done in alignment with a
well-intended strategic plan, the less context they will have for transferring those skills to the world
beyond school.
Strategic plans for educational services therefore must be comprehensively planned for all students,
including those who experience disability. Coherence between strategic initiatives for general and
special education is essential. Developing a strategic plan specific to special education services
statewide, in isolation from the Department’s overall strategic plan, would move Department efforts
away from rather than towards this needed coherence.
The Department agrees that improving outcomes for students who experience disability should be
strategically planned—which is done through the Federally required State Systemic Improvement Plan
(SSIP)—and believes in the value of having a strategic plan to guide all educational efforts, including
special education, but fundamentally disagrees with the idea of a separate special education strategic
plan to guide the delivery of special education services statewide.
References
Special Education, 34 C.F.R. § 300.39(b)(3) (2017).
SWIFT Education Center. (2017). Equity as a Basis for Inclusive Educational Systems Change, Research to
Practice Brief. Lawrence, KS: Author.
RECOMMENDATION 2
Provide additional technical assistance to EI/ECSE contractors so that they can expand
identification efforts in areas with child care and primary care shortages.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree  June 1, 2022 Kara Williams
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Narrative for Recommendation 2
Identification efforts for EI/ECSE have been impacted by COVID-19 as infants, toddlers, and children are
not regularly attending their healthcare providers, childcare centers and preschools that would typically
be providing referrals for EI/ECSE. We anticipate that this will continue to be a concern as districts and
programs are making plans for the 2020-21 school year that may include the adoption of distance
learning or hybrid models where children are not regularly observed. Additionally, the childcare
landscape will also be impacted as many childcare businesses have been closed due to financial
challenges. We anticipate that we will see many more childcare deserts in Oregon now than there were
pre-COVID.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● The Department will review the Early Learning Division’s data on county-level childcare
availability.
● The Department will facilitate communications with EI/ECSE contractors focusing on information
from their service area plans, specifically their plans for identification and evaluation of children
in areas with identified childcare and primary care shortages.
●  The Department will design and deliver individualized technical assistance based on the needs
identified through the data and conversations.
RECOMMENDATION 3
Document efforts to increase the number of children receiving ECSE services in high-
quality, inclusive early childhood placements in areas identified as child care deserts
for children age three through five.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
June 1, 2022
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 3
This recommendation will be directly impacted by the anticipated state budget shortfalls experienced by
both the Early Learning Division and EI/ECSE due to COVID. The Early Learning Division funds early
learning programs such as Head Start and Preschool Promise, as well as providing subsidies for childcare
providers. These programs make up the majority of inclusive placements for children who experience
disabilities. Budget shortfalls will mean a reduction in the availability of inclusive placements. At the
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
time of this response, it is unknown how deep budget reductions based on both expected General Fund
and Student Success Act fund shortfalls will be and therefore it is difficult to determine a baseline for the
coming school year from which to measure success in implementing this recommendation.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● The Department will continue to lead the High Quality Inclusion Technical Assistance Initiative
and will continue to assemble the Statewide Leadership Team and Community Teams to guide
and implement this work.
● The Department will review the Service Area Plan, submitted by EI/ECSE contractors annually,
for opportunities to document program efforts towards securing inclusive placements in
childcare deserts.
RECOMMENDATION 4
Determine whether funds from all sources are sufficient to meet targets in the
adequate service model and report to the Legislature on any remaining gaps in
funding to reach that goal.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree  May 1, 2021
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 4
The Department reports on the number of infants, toddlers, and children that are provided adequate
service levels in EI/ECSE. The Department then uses these figures, along with calculations using the
funding model, to identify the anticipated shortage in funding to provide adequate services for all
children. This information is included in the State Interagency Coordinating Council’s Governor’s Report
which is made public and presented to legislators annually. This information is also included in the
agency’s biennial presentation to Ways and Means on its budget.
RECOMMENDATION 5
Define a reference population to identify which regions are experiencing disproportionality by
race and ethnicity in both identification and delivery of EI/ECSE services.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
PARTIALLY Agree (measure
ECSE population ages 3-5)
July 1, 2020
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 5
IDEA section 618(d)(1) (20 U.S.C. 1418(d)(1)) requires States to provide for the collection and
examination of data to determine if significant disproportionality based on race and ethnicity is
occurring in the State and LEAs of the State. Under 34 C.F.R. § 300.647(b)(3)(i)-(ii), States are now
required to examine populations age 3 through 21 for significant disproportionality in identification of
children as children with disabilities and as children with specific impairments. Adding ages 3-5 is a new
requirement, there is no requirement to measure this for Early Intervention (ages birth-3). Adding
another population beyond this new requirement would require additional resources during an
anticipated budget reduction time period.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● As per guidance from the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Special Education Programs,
ODE will use  the File Specification (FS)089 — Children with Disabilities Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Early Childhood and (FS)002 - Children with Disabilities (IDEA)
School Age files for the risk numerator.
RECOMMENDATION 6
Identify data sets necessary to determine whether any EI/ECSE contractors are over-
or under-identifying children from historically underserved races or ethnicities.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
PARTIALLY Agree (measure
ECSE population, ages 3-5)
July 1, 2020
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 6
IDEA section 618(d)(1) (20 U.S.C. 1418(d)(1)) requires States to provide for the collection and
examination of data to determine if significant disproportionality based on race and ethnicity is
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
occurring in the State and LEAs of the State. Under 34 C.F.R. § 300.647(b)(3)(i)-(ii), States are now
required to examine populations age 3 through 21 for significant disproportionality in identification of
children as children with disabilities and as children with specific impairments. Adding ages 3-5 is a new
requirement, there is no requirement to measure this for Early Intervention (ages birth-3). Adding
another population beyond this new requirement would require additional resources during an
anticipated budget reduction time period.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● As per newly released guidance from the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Special
Education Programs (June 2,2020), ODE will use use the File Specification (FS)089 — Children
with Disabilities Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Early Childhood and (FS)002 -
Children with Disabilities (IDEA) School Age files for the risk numerator and File Specification
(FS)052 — Membership for the risk denominator, in examining populations 3-21 for the
purposes of calculating significant disproportionality.
RECOMMENDATION 7
Require EI/ECSE contractors to report to ODE on subcontractors’ coordination of the
transition of children receiving ECSE services into school-age programs, including
information about how many pre-kindergarten transition meetings are attended by
special education personnel who provide services to school-age children.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
June 30, 2021
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 7
School age personnel are not required to attend kindergarten transition meetings. However, EI/ECSE is
responsible to assure that an invitation is extended. The Department does not currently collect data on
school age special education personnel attendance at pre-kindergarten meetings. Annually, a select
number of files are reviewed as part of the Procedural Compliance Review. Of the selected files, a
percentage are children transitioning to kindergarten and there is a question regarding whether school
age personnel were invited to the transition meeting.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
● The Department will review data gathered from the PCR reviews as a snapshot of school-age
personnel invitations statewide.
● The Department will consult with EI/ECSE contractors to ascertain the best way to collect
information regarding school-age personnel invitations and attendance at transition meetings.
● The first round of data collection will occur by June 30, 2021.
RECOMMENDATION 8
Work with EI/ECSE contractors to monitor and improve subcontractors’ processes for
facilitating coordination of the transition of children receiving ECSE services into
school age programs.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree  June 30, 2022
Kara Williams
Narrative for Recommendation 8
This recommendation will follow recommendation number 7 which will establish a data collection of
school-age personnel invitations and attendance at transition meetings.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● The Department will identify and share resources and promising practices with Contractors and
Subcontractors regarding transition coordination.
● The Department will host a review of the data set during the EI/ECSE Contractor’s meetings in
2021-22. During these meetings, contractors will be asked to share their challenges and
promising practices to increase school-age personnel participation in transition meetings.
● The Department will add a question to the Service Area Plan regarding practices established to
coordinate the transition of children receiving ECSE services into school age programs.
Contractors have the primary obligation to review and approve subcontractor SAPs.
RECOMMENDATION 9
Present the recommendations of this audit to the System of Care Advisory Council
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree  October 1, 2021 Candace Pelt
Narrative for Recommendation 9
The Department agrees with the recommendation to present the recommendations of this audit to the
System of Care Advisory Council.
Planned actions for this recommendation include:
● The Department will share the desire to present recommendations to the System of Care
Advisory Council at an upcoming council meeting.
● The Department will seek time on a council meeting agenda to share recommendations.
● The Department will share recommendations no later than October 1, 2021.
RECOMMENDATION 10
Offer training or professional development on culturally-competent pre-referral
identification techniques at times and locations that are accessible to school district
personnel throughout the state.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
PARTIALLY Agree  Provided by auditee Eric Wells
Narrative for Recommendation 10
The Department partially agrees with the recommendation to “offer training or professional
development on culturally-competent pre-referral identification techniques at times and locations that
are accessible to school district personnel throughout the state.”  Specifically, while the Department
recognizes the need for ongoing professional learning related to culturally competent pre-referral
processes, and is committed to providing the support that districts and schools need in order to
appropriately identify children who experience disabilities, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
precludes a commitment to providing learning opportunities “at times and locations that are accessible
to school district personnel throughout the state.”  In the midst of the deepest recession Oregon has
faced since data started being kept (Department of Administrative Services, 2020, p. 4), and with
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
significant uncertainty surrounding the state’s revenue forecast, the Department cannot commit to
travelling to provide professional development.
Rather, the Department can commit to the following planned actions towards this recommendation:
● Develop an online module that interested parties can access related to culturally competent
pre-referral processes.
● Make the module accessible on demand to interested school staff throughout Oregon.
● Publicize the module through relationships with specialists and interested groups (e.g.,
Curriculum and Instruction Leaders, Special Education Directors, ESDs, SACSE, SICC).
Reference
Department of Administrative Services. (2020). Oregon Economic and Revenue Forecast. June 2020. Retrieved
from: https://www.oregon.gov/das/OEA/Documents/forecast0620.pdf
RECOMMENDATION 11
Determine which ESDs and school districts have the most difficulties hiring and
retaining special education staff and specialists.
Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Disagree N/A N/A
Narrative for Recommendation 11
Oregon’s educational system places hiring and retention of staff firmly within local authority and
control.  ESDs and school districts are responsible for hiring and retention of staff consistent with TSPC
requirements. The Department lacks statutory authority to make or support hiring and retention
decisions.  However, the Department is happy to partner with ESDs and school districts at their request
to provide needed support in this area.
The Department also finds it problematic to characterize “the most difficulties” as requested in this
recommendation.  Even assuming appropriate statutory authority existed, ranking the relative
challenges faced by districts and ESDs in navigating their local hiring context is ill advised. All districts
and ESDs need to address the challenge(s) regardless of how minor or severe.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Additionally, in the midst of the current severe recession, the Department anticipates that human
resource needs will fundamentally shift throughout the state.  While there will still be a need for special
education staff and specialists, the nature of this need is likely to change as the state works to respond
to the current recession brought about by COVID-19.  The current deviation from predictable economic
patterns brought about by COVID-19 makes it likely that, even if such data could be effectively gathered,
it would be of limited utility in planning specific data, guidance, and resources for ESDs and school
districts that addressed hiring and retention concerns in a sustainable, long-term manner.
RECOMMENDATION 12
Develop a plan to provide data, guidance, and resources to ESDs and school districts
based on the specific needs of their regions to improve retention of special education
staff and specialists (e.g., additional support for home-grown training programs and
additional financial incentives for harder-to-staff regions of the state).
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Disagree
N/A
N/A
Narrative for Recommendation 12
The Department notes that the legislature has clearly conveyed a desire for state level support in
matters related to hiring and retention. Senate Bill 182 (2017) spoke to the desire for this state level
action through the establishment of the Educator Advancement Council (EAC). Among other priority
areas, the EAC focuses on “researching and addressing issues related to educator workforce supply and
demand” (EAC, n.d.). With the EAC’s establishment, implementation of this recommendation clearly
rests outside the statutory scope of the Department. The Department is willing to engage with EAC on
an ongoing basis as needed to support their efforts related to staff retention.
Districts and ESDs have significant local authority and control over hiring and retention of staff as it
makes sense for their immediate context. Therefore, the Department is also willing to support districts
and ESDs as they request in this regard, but will do so in coordination and collaboration with the EAC
and their Regional Education Networks as the statutorily authorized and appropriate bodies to lead this
work.
Reference
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Educator Advancement Council. (n.d.). Educator Advancement Council. Retrieved from:
https://www.oregon.gov/eac/Pages/default.aspx.
RECOMMENDATION 13
Begin the process to develop and implement a centralized statewide system for IEP
information, modeled after the existing Individualized Family Service Plan system (ecWeb) by:
a. Reviewing the IEP systems already in use in the state.
b. Identifying the needs of the personnel who administer existing systems and
the needs of the districts who will use the new system.
c. Identifying the stakeholders who will participate in the initial rollout of a
centralized IEP system.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Disagree
N/A
N/A
Narrative for Recommendation 13
The Department agrees that a centralized statewide system for IEP information would be beneficial over
the long-term.  However, given the current state context, development and implementation of this
system is not a current priority.  Given the impact of COVID-19 on the state’s economy, and the
significant budget shortfalls that state government, districts, and schools will be operating under for the
next several years, the timing is not right for implementing such a system.  Beyond the cost of the
system itself, it would require training for staff across the state who are already being asked to make up
for budget shortfalls through furlough days and additional responsibilities.  Introducing new IEP system
requirements in the current strained system would be ill advised and is a path the Department cannot
currently support.  It is the Department’s hope to revisit this possibility as additional information about
future budget forecasts becomes available.
Please contact Terri Ward at [503-931-0259] with any questions.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Sincerely,
Colt Gill
Director
Oregon Department of Education
cc: Lindsey Capps
Alyssa Chatterjee
Cindy Hunt
Candace Pelt
Terri Ward
Audit Team
Will Garber, CGFM, MPA, Deputy Director
Andrew Love, CFE, Audit Manager
Krystine McCants, MS Econ., Senior Auditor
T. Cornforth, Staff Auditor
Kathy Scott, DrPH, Staff Auditor
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of Public
Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected Secretary of State and is
independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon government.
The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards and commissions as well as
administer municipal audit law.
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500 | Salem | OR | 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits