Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020
Interstate Cooperative Agreement with Washington State Office of State Auditor
November 2020
Report 2020-40
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Bev Clarno Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Jeff Morgan 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Interim Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
Board of Commissioners
Columbia River Gorge Commission
In accordance with the Interstate Cooperative Agreement between the Washington State
Auditor’s Office and the Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division, we performed
procedures to verify Oregon’s share of the Columbia River Gorge Commission’s joint
expenditures and Commissioners’ compensation are in compliance with laws and
regulations of the State of Oregon.
Washington State Auditor’s Office performed an audit of the Columbia River Gorge
Commission and prepared Independent Auditor Reports on the commission’s financial
statement and on internal control over financial reporting as of and for the year ended June
30, 2020.
The Oregon Audits Division is issuing these reports as a matter of public information for
the taxpayers of Oregon. Likewise, the Washington State Auditor’s Office has issued the
reports for public use in the State of Washington.
State of Oregon
November 24, 2020
Financial Statement  Audit Report
Columbia River Gorge Commission
For the period July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020
Published November 24, 2020
Report No. 1027292
Insurance Building, P.O. Box 40021  Olympia, Washington 98504-0021  (564) 999-0950  Pat.McCarthy@sao.wa.gov
Office of the Washington State Auditor
Pat McCarthy
November 24, 2020
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
Report on Financial Statement
Please find attached our report on the Columbia River Gorge Commission’s financial statement.
We are issuing this report in order to provide information on specific financial activity of the
Commission.
Sincerely,
Pat McCarthy
State Auditor
Olympia, WA
Americans with Disabilities
In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, we will make this document available in
alternative formats. For more information, please contact our Office at  (564) 999 -0950, TDD
Relay at (800) 833-6388, or email our webmaster at webmaster@sao.wa.gov.
Office of the Washington State Auditor
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Independent Auditor's Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance with
Government Auditing Standards..................................................................................................... 4
Independent Auditor's Report on Financial Statements .................................................................. 6
Financial Section ............................................................................................................................. 8
About the State Auditor's Office ....................................................................................................12
Office of the Washington State Auditor
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’ S REPORT ON INTERNAL  CONTROL
OVER FINANCIAL REPOR TING AND ON COMPLIANCE AND
OTHER MATTERS BASED ON AN AUDIT OF  A FINANCIAL
STATEMENT  PERFORMED IN ACCORD ANCE WITH
GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the Statement of Expenditures
– Budget and Actual – General Fund of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, as of and for the
year ended June 30, 2020, and the related notes (the financial statement) and have issued our report
thereon dated November 24, 2020.
INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statement, we considered the Commission’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) to determine the audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expr essing our opinion on the finan cial
statement, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Commission’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of
the Commission’s internal control.
A deficiency in internal control  exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent,
or detect and correct, mi sstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of the Commission’s financial statement will not be prevented, or detected
and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency  is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough
to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Office of the Washington State Auditor
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph
of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be
material weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did
not identify any deficiencies in internal control that we cons ider to be material weaknesses.
However, material weaknesses may exist that have not been identified.
COMPLIANCE AND OTHER MATTERS
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Commission’s financial statement is
free from material misstatement, we performed tests of the Commission’s compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could
have a direct and material effect on the determination o f financial statement amounts. However,
providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and
accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required
to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of interna l control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Commission’s inte rnal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit
performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the Commission’s
internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not s uitable for any other
purpose. However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited. It also
serves to diss eminate information to the public as a reporting tool to help citizens assess
government operations.
Pat McCarthy
State Auditor
Olympia, WA
November 24, 2020
Office of the Washington State Auditor
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’ S REPORT ON
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT
We have audited the accompanying Statement of Expenditures – Budget and Actual – General
Fund of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2020, and
the related notes (the financial statement), as listed on page 8.
Management’s Responsibil ity for the Financial Statement
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of this financial statement in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America; this
includes the design, implementation and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation
and fair presentation of a financial statement that is free from material misstatement, whether due
to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion  on the financial statement based on our audit . We
conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States
of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller  General of the United States. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statement
is free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures  to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statement. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgment,
including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statement, whether
due to frau d or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control
relevant to the Commission’s preparation and fair presentation of the financial statement in order
to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, bu t not for the purpose of
Office of the Washington State Auditor
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Commission’s internal control. Accordingly, we
express no such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting
policies used and the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as
well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statement.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis
for our audit opinion.
Opin ion
In our opinion, the financial statement referred to above presents fairly, in all material respects,
the budgeted and actual expenditures of the Columbia River Gorge Commission for the year ended
June 30, 2020 in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
OTHER REPORTING REQUIRED BY GOVERNMENT AUDITING
STANDARDS
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards , we have also issued our report dated
November 24, 2020 on our consideration of the Commission’s  internal control over financial
reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts
and grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is to describe the scope of our
testing of internal con trol over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing,
and not to provide an opinion on internal control over financi al reporting or on compliance. That
report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards
in considering the Commission’s internal control over financial reporting and compliance.
Pat McCarthy
State Auditor
Olympia, WA
November 24, 2020
Office of the Washington State Auditor
FINANCIAL SECTION
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2019 through June 30, 2020
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
Statement of Expenditures – Budget and Actual – General Fund – 2020
Notes to the Financial Statement – 2020
Columbia River Gorge Commission
Washington State Agency #460
Oregon State Agency #350
Statement of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
General Fund
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
General Fund:
2019-2021
Budget
YR1 Actual Exp.
June 30, 2020
YR2 Actual Exp.
June 30, 2021
Other Private/Local Expenditures
Klickitat County
40,000
35,456
-
Donations 10,000 5,117
Total Other
50,000
40,573
-
Washington Expenditures:
Joint Operating 1,117,000 537,339 -
Klickitat County 139,000 43,365
Commissioners 32,000 15,019
Total Washington
1,288,000
595,723
-
Oregon Expenditures:
Joint Operating 1,117,000 537,337 -
Commissioners 32,612 9,338 -
Total Oregon
1,149,612
546,675
-
Total Agency                                                         2,487,612                    1,182,971                               -
Summary
Washington & Oregon Joint 2,234,000 1,074,676 -
Washington Commissioners 32,000 15,019 -
Oregon Commissioners 32,612 9,338 -
Klickitat County 139,000 43,365 -
Other Private/Local 50,000 40,573 -
Total Agency 2,487,612 1,182,971 -
Less Oregon Commissioners 32,612 9,338 -
Total on Washington AFRS Reports 2,455,000 1,173,633 -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this statement.
Columbia River Gorge Commission
Washington State Agency No. 460
Oregon State Agency No. 350
Notes to the Financial Statement
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accompanying Statement of Expenditures-Budget and Actual of the Columbia River Gorge
Commission has been prepared to meet the requirements of the Columbia River Gorge Compact and the
Interstate Cooperative Agreement between the Washington State Office of State Auditor and the Orego n
Secretary of State, Audits Division.  The Statement of Expenditures -Budget and Actual is not intended to
be a complete presentation of the commission’s assets, liabilities, and revenues nor does it constitute a
complete set of financial statements in acc ordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  The
more significant of the state’s accounting policies are as follows:
A.  Reporting Entity
The commission is a regional agency authorized by Congress through the Columbia River Gorge National
Scenic Area Act (PL 99-663) and created by the states of Washington and Oregon by interstate compact.
The commission is comprised of 12 members from the two states and one member appointed by the US
Secretary of Agriculture.  Its primary role involves planning, consulting, and oversight in the implementation
of the federal legislation.  The commission has an authorized staff level of 7.5 FTEs.
B.  Measurement Focus and Basis of Accounting
The commission uses the general fund to account for all of Columbia Ri ver Gorge Commission’s general
activities. The accounting and financial reporting treatment applied to a fund is determined by its
measurement focus.  The general fund is accounted for using a current financial resources measurement
focus.  With this measu rement focus, only current assets and current liabilities generally are included on
the balance sheet.  Operating statements for this fund present increases (i.e., revenues and other financial
sources) and decreases (i.e., expenditures and other financing uses) as changes in net current assets.
The modified accrual basis of accounting is used by the general fund.  Under the modified accrual basis of
accounting, revenues are recognized when susceptible to accrual (i.e., when they become both measurable
and available).  “Measurable” means the amount of the transaction can be reasonably estimable .
“Available” means collectible within the current period or soon enough thereafter to be used to pay liabilities
of the current period.
Under modified accrual accounting, expenditures are recognized when the related fund liability is incurred,
if measurable .  Exceptions to the general modified accrual expenditure recognition criteria include
unmatured interest on general long-term indebtedness which are recognized when due and compensated
absences which are recognized when paid.
C.  General Budgetary Policies and Procedures
The legal level of budgetary control is at the fund/account, agency and appropriation level, with
administrative controls established at lower l evels of detail in certain instances.  Annual budgets are
established at the state s’ legislative level thro ugh an allotment process.  F unding is provided by
appropriations from the states of Washington and Oregon.  Other sources of revenue received during the
period, included receipts from the Klickitat County , Washington , and donations received from a prior
Commissioner from the state of Washington.
Commissioner compensation, including travel, is paid directly, and accounted for separately, by each state.
Washington State has funded one position to support land use planning for Klickitat County, Washington ,
which is accounted for separately by Washington. All other commission expenditures are joint expenditures,
which are shared equally by both states.  These expenditures are processed, paid, and accounted for by
the states of Washington and Oregon.  Oregon reimburses Washington for its 50 percent share.
D.  Compensated Absences
Annual Leave and Sick Leave
Commission employees accrue vested annual leave at a variable rate based on years of service.  In
general, accrued annual leave cannot exceed 30 days at the employee’s anniversary date.
Employees accrue sick leave at the rate of one day per month without limitation on the amount that can be
accumulated.  Sick leave is not vested; i.e., the commission does not pay employees for unused sick leave
upon termination except upon employee death or ret irement.  At death or retirement, the commission is
liable for 25 percent of the employee’s accumulated sick leave.  In addition, the commission has a “sick
leave buyout option” in which each January, employees who accumulate sick leave in excess of 60 days
may redeem sick leave earned but not taken during the previous year at the rate of one day’s pay in
exchange for each four days of sick leave.    Accordingly, the general fund recognizes sick leave when it is
paid.
Note 2 - Retirement System
Commission employees are currently members of the Washington state retirement system.  (Actuarial and
other information of this system can be found in the Washington State Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report.)
Note 3 – Subsequent Events
In March 2020, the Governors of the states of Oregon and Washington declared a state of emergency in
response to the spread of a deadly new virus. In the weeks following the declaration, precautionary
measures to slow the spread of the virus have been ordered. These measures include requirements to
social distance and prohibitions on public gatherings to reduce transmission of the virus. The measures
have led to the closure of or modified business activities for public and private sector organizations,
cancelling public events, limiting public and private social gatherings, and requiring people to stay home
unless they are performing an essential activity.
The length of time these measures will be in place, and the full extent of the financial impact on the
Commission is unknown at this time.
Office of the Washington State Auditor
ABOUT THE STATE A UDITOR’S OFFICE
The State Auditor’ s Office is established in the state’ s Constitution and is part of the executive
branch of state government. The State Auditor is elected by the citizens of Washington and serves
four-year terms.
We work with our au dit clients and citizens to achieve our vision of government that works for
citizens, by helping governments work better, cost less, deliver higher value, and earn greater
public trust.
In fulfilling our mission to hold state and local governments accounta ble for the use of public
resources, we also hold ourselves accountable by continually improving our audit quality and
operational efficiency and developing highly engaged and committed employees.
As an el ected agency, the State Auditor’ s Office has the in dependence necessary to objectively
perform audits and investigations. Our audits are designed to comply with professional standards
as well as to satisfy the requirements of federal, state, and local laws.
Our audits look at financial information and comp liance with state, federal and local laws on the
part of all local governments, including schools, and all state agencies, including institutions of
higher education. In addition, we conduct performance audits of state agencies and local
governments as well as fraud, state whistleblower and citizen hotline investigations.
The results of our work are widely distributed through a variety of reports, which are available on
our website and through our free, electronic subscription service.
We take our role as partners in accountability seriously, and provide training and technical
assistance to governments, and have an extensive quality assurance program.
Contact information for the State Auditor’s Office
Public Records requests PublicRecords@sao.wa.gov
Main telephone (564) 999-0950
Toll-free Citizen Hotline (866) 902-3900
Website www.sao.wa.gov