Secretary of State Bev Clarno
Audits Division Director Kip Memmott
Oregon Department of Education
High School Success Planning Is Robust, but ODE Can
Enhance Benefits of Measure 98 by Improving
Monitoring and Analysis
December 2020
Report 2020-44
Oregon Department of Education
High School Success Planning Is Robust,
but ODE Can Enhance Benefits of Measure
98 by Improving Monitoring and Analysis
What We Found
1. In implementing Measure 98, ODE held a robust and effective planning
process, resulting in 230 recipients with approved plans. The majority of
High School Success program recipients were satisfied with the planning
process. (pg. 9)
2. High School Success program staff are deliberate about involving staff
from other ODE programs, increasing collaboration within the agency
and reducing the burden on recipients. (pg. 10)
3. Recipients can make changes to their plans throughout the year. ODE
staff reviewed requested changes for statutory compliance, but did not
evaluate the impact of changes on expected outcomes. (pg. 11
)
4. ODE staff access student-level demographic and outcome data, but some
information held by recipients is only reviewed during site visits. ODE
staff are not able to easily aggregate it for higher level analyses across
program participants. Additional analyses would help the High School
Success program better align with ODE’s larger equity initiatives. (pg. 13)
What We Recommend
We made five recommendations to ODE intended to improve the High
School Success team’s monitoring and data analysis processes.
ODE agreed with all of our recommendations. Their response can be found
at the end of the report.
Why This Audit is
Important
» Oregon Ballot Measure 98
was approved by voters in
2016 to address Oregon’s low
high school graduation rate
and expand career-technical
course offerings.
» To carry out the intent of
Measure 98, the High School
Success program in the Oregon
Department of Education
(ODE) serves 230 school
districts and charter schools,
funding new or expanded
career-technical education
programs, college-level
opportunities, and dropout
prevention strategies.
» For the 2016-17 school year,
when Measure 98 passed,
76.7% of students graduated
within four years. By the end of
the 2017-18 school year,
Oregon’s rate had improved to
78.7% for all students, but
disparities in educational
achievement persist for some
populations.
» The High School Success
team applies ODE’s equity lens
to recipients’ self-assessments,
plan development, and
application processes.
The Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division is an independent, nonpartisan organization that conducts audits based on
objective, reliable information to help state government operate more efficiently and effectively. The summary above should be
considered in connection with a careful review of the full report.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 1
Introduction
Oregon Ballot Measure 98 was approved by voters on November 8, 2016, and established the
High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund. The measure’s intent was to
address Oregon’s low high school graduation rate and expand career-technical course offerings.
The Oregon Department of Education (ODE) created the High School Success program to oversee
activities supported by this fund. This program is housed in ODE’s Office of Education
Innovation and Improvements.
ODE’s mission is to foster equity and excellence for every learner through collaboration with
educators, partners, and communities. Oregon, however, has struggled to graduate all its high
school students. This audit, which is required by statute,1 reviewed the High School Success
program’s processes to support districts and charter schools through planning, adjust approved
plans, and determine whether program recipients, including school districts and charter schools,
are operating according to ODE’s equity lens.2
Many in the state share responsibility for the success of high school education
Improving high school outcomes requires the coordination of state government, local education
agencies, and their partners. ODE supports the State Board of Education in carrying out its
responsibilities for the general governance of public schools. Education Service Districts provide
services to school districts on a regional basis, and both Education Service Districts and school
districts work with Career and Technical Education (CTE) providers, community colleges, and
businesses to deliver programs to high school students.
1 Oregon Laws 2017 Chapter 1, which established the High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund, requires the
Secretary of State to conduct financial and program audits every two years. House Bill 2246, which amended the Measure 98 Act,
retained this requirement. The first financial audit of the fund (report 2020-20) was released in May 2020.
2 https://www.oregon.gov/ode/students-and-family/equity/equityinitiatives/Documents/OregonEquityLens.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 2
Oregon state government sets policies and oversees local education agencies
The responsibility to ensure that Oregon students graduate from high school is shared among
state-level legislators, ODE, and the agency’s regional and local educational partners. State
legislators allocated money from the state’s General Fund to support Measure 98 and, over the
years, have passed legislation and approved grants that seek to enhance high school-related
outcomes.
ODE administers and monitors these grants, provides technical assistance to local education
authorities, and plays an important role in carrying out the State Board of Education’s policies
and standards. The seven members of this board are appointed by the Governor, who serves as
Oregon’s Superintendent of Public Instruction. ODE’s director is the Deputy Superintendent of
Public Instruction.
ODE collects, evaluates, and reports high school student
performance information and works to address
disparities in educational opportunity and attainment for
students of color. The agency is charged with ensuring
that school districts comply with laws and rules, including
the federal Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, which
replaced the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001. The
purpose of the Every Student Succeeds Act is to provide
all children with significant opportunities to receive a fair,
equitable, and high-quality education, and to close
achievement gaps. ODE staffing consists of 639 positions with a 2019-21 legislatively adopted
budget of $4.05 billion.
Oregon’s 197 school districts and their elected boards are responsible for governing their
schools consistent with the policies and standards set by the State Board of Education, while the
state’s 19 Education Service Districts assist local school districts in their designated regions by
providing equitable, cost-effective, and locally responsive education services. School districts
and Education Service Districts, in turn, work in conjunction with local businesses and
community colleges to implement CTE courses.
CTE provides students with the academic content and relevant technical knowledge and skills
needed to prepare for further education and careers in current or emerging professions. CTE
programs of study may lead to industry-recognized credentials, certificates, or an associate
degree. Examples of CTE courses currently offered in Oregon high schools include medical office
procedures, digital arts, culinary arts, accounting, agriculture management, aquaponics, and
fisheries technology.
ODE’s Secondary/Post-Secondary Transitions team oversees the federal funds that come to the
state out of the Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21
st Century Act. This act
is also called Perkins V, named for the sponsor of the original CTE Act of 1984 and because it is
the fifth reauthorization of the legislation.
Perkins V requires states to develop four-year plans that present a strategic vision and goals for
preparing an educated and skilled workforce and meeting the needs of employers. This includes
ensuring equal access to CTE programs of study and activities. Perkins V activities are related to
those of the High School Success program, given that program’s support of CTE in districts and
charter schools.
We need to make sure that every
single one of our students is Future
Ready. That means each one of them
graduates from high school with a
plan for their future and the skills to
compete in a global economy.
- Governor Kate Brown, 2019
Inaugural Address
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 3
Oregon has struggled to graduate all its high school students
Key indicators show that Oregon’s education system has challenges ensuring that all children
succeed in high school. The system struggles to support students in the ninth grade while
research is clear that students experiencing more challenges in ninth grade are more likely to
drop out as sophomores and efforts to support them need to begin before they enter high school.
Keeping children engaged in school through participation in coursework like CTE programs
increases the likelihood that they will graduate.
Regular attendance, ninth grade on-track, dropout, and high school graduation rates are
not yet hitting state benchmarks
In Oregon, students are considered regular attenders if they are present for more than 90% of
their enrolled school days; this rate worsens as students advance in high school. For the 2018-19
school year, 79% of ninth graders, but only 60.7% of 12th graders, were regular attenders. The
state’s long-term goal is for 93% of students across all grade levels to attend regularly.
Students who have been enrolled in a single district for at least half of the school year are
considered on-track to graduate when they have obtained at least 25% of the credits required
for high school graduation in the ninth grade. For the 2018-19 school year, 85% of Oregon ninth
graders were on-track; this rate has improved across student groups, although it is not yet at the
state’s long-term goal of 95%.
Oregon’s high school dropout rate, measured for grades nine through 12, has also improved over
the past five years, from a high of 4.3% of students in the 2014-15 school year to 3.6% in the
2017-18 school year. The United States has seen a similar decline, from 5.2% in 2014 to 4.7% in
2017, among students enrolled in grades 10 through 12.
Figure 1: Historically and traditionally marginalized students had the lowest four-year cohort graduation
rates for 2017-183
Source: Created using data from the National Center for Education Statistics. Oregon’s homeless enrolled students had a four-year cohort
graduation rate of 54%. That figure for the United States was not available.
3 In Oregon’s 2017 Consolidated State Plan under the Every Student Succeeds Act, the term historically and traditionally marginalized
students refers to English Learners, Black and African American students, American Indian and Alaskan Native students, Latino and Hispanic
students, Asian and Pacific Islander students, Multi-racial students, students experiencing poverty, students with disabilities, and students
who are LGBTQ.
61%
56%
65%
68%
72%
75%
80%
88%
79%
67%
68%
74%
79%
80%
81%
89%
92%
85%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Students experiencing disabilities
Limited English proficiency
American Indian/American Native
Black
Economically disadvantaged
Hispanic
White
Asian/Pacific Islander
All students
United States
Oregon
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 4
ODE looks at the percentage of students who earn a regular or modified diploma within four
years of entering ninth grade to determine the state’s four-year cohort graduation rate. The
long-term goal for this rate is 90%. For the 2016-17 school year, when Measure 98 passed,
76.7% of students graduated within four years. The national rate, at that time, was 84.6%. By the
end of the 2017-18 school year, Oregon’s rate improved to 79% for all students — but
disparities in educational achievement persist for some populations, as shown in Figure 1.
Participation in CTE programs has a positive influence on high school graduation rates. CTE
concentrators4 are more likely to graduate high school than their peers at rates above the state
average; this difference holds true across racial and ethnic groups, as shown in Figure 2.
Research has also shown that strategies aimed at improving middle school attendance could
have as much, or more, of a payoff for high school and college graduation as efforts aimed at
improving test scores.
Figure 2: CTE concentrators graduate high school at higher rates than their peers who don’t participate in CTE
Source: ODE, Oregon’s CTE State Plan, 2020-2024.
In addition to the High School Success program, ODE has implemented several interventions to
address the multiple barriers students face to graduating high school. The intent behind these
efforts is to identify early indicators of risk (e.g., grades or course failure, behavior) and students
at risk, select and implement interventions, and continuously evaluate the effectiveness of those
interventions. ODE’s initiatives around this effort include the Early Indicator and Intervention
System, the Statewide Chronic Absenteeism Plan, and the Trauma-Informed Pilot Project.
Measure 98 emphasized career-technical education, college-level
opportunities, and dropout prevention strategies
The purpose of the High School Success program, created as a result of the passage of Measure
98, is to improve students’ progress toward graduation, increase graduation rates, and advance
high school students’ college and career readiness. Districts and charter schools can apply for
4 A CTE concentrator is defined as, “[a]ny secondary student who has earned one or more credits in technical skill-based courses as
part of an Oregon state-approved CTE program, of which at least one-half credit must be designated as a required course.”
78.7
65.3
90.6
74.6 78.4 75.4 80.1
92.8 89.8 >95 92.6 91.2 92.3 90.1 93.1
All students CTE concentrators
Percent of students
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 5
the funds and are required to meet specific eligibility criteria to receive their allocation. The
funds are to be used to create new programs, not to maintain existing ones.
House Bill 2246 expanded Measure 98’s eligibility and refined activities based on funding
level
Oregon Ballot Measure 98 (2016) established a fund for school districts and charter schools to
establish or expand opportunities and strategies in the following three areas:
• Career-technical education. CTE programs of study cut across multiple employment
sectors including agriculture, food and natural resource systems, arts, information and
communications, business and management, human resources, health sciences, and
industrial and engineering systems.
• College-level education. These opportunities include advanced and dual-credit
programs in conjunction with accredited institutions of higher learning such community
colleges or public universities that offer the opportunity to earn college credit while a
student is still enrolled in high school.
• Dropout prevention strategies. These include activities to reduce chronic absenteeism
such as identifying students at risk of dropping out and giving them academic and social
support and providing them with early exposure to employment opportunities and
options for post-secondary education.
The measure required the Legislature to make available $800 per high school student, per
school year out of the General Fund for these activities. The funds are apportioned to each
school district based on the extended weighted average daily membership of high school
students. The apportioned funds cannot be used to maintain programs established before the
measure’s effective date, except to replace the loss or expiration of funds from time-limited
grants. The Legislature initially found $170 million for the fund for the 2017-19 biennium. The
Student Success Act, passed in 2019, filled the remaining gap by adding an additional $133
million to the fund.
To qualify for an apportionment, districts and charter schools were required to conduct a self-
assessment and have a biennial plan approved by ODE that met the following eligibility criteria:
• Setting aside time for teachers to meet and review data to identify students at risk of not
graduating and to develop plans for those students;
• Implementation of evidence-based practices for reducing chronic absenteeism;
• Assignment of high school students to advanced and dual-credit courses based on
academic qualifications to avoid bias in course assignments;
• Implementation of systems to ensure that high school students are taking courses
required for on-time graduation; and
• Showing that the district or charter schools have created community partnerships.
In 2017, the Oregon Legislature amended the program through House Bill 2246 to include, as
fund recipients, the Oregon School for the Deaf, the Youth Corrections Education Program, and
the Juvenile Detention Education Program. House Bill 2246 also allows fund recipients to use up
to 15% of their apportionments on students in the eighth grade.
The legislation also created a tiered system for the three areas established in the original ballot
measure based on funding level. If, in the first year of the program, the recipient receives:
• Less than $100,000, they may choose to address any or all three programmatic areas as
is appropriate to local need;
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 6
• More than $100,000 but less than $350,000, they must address CTE and one of the other
two programmatic areas, but may address all three; or
• More than $350,000, they must address all three programmatic areas.
ODE’s High School Success team consists of five education specialists, one research analyst, a
program analyst, and an administrative specialist who all supported the 230 districts and
charter schools that were awarded High School Success funds during the period reviewed during
this audit. This team has been overseen by four superintendents and five directors since the
program’s inception.
The COVID-19 pandemic emerged during this audit and has short- and long-
term consequences for Oregon’s education system
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted Oregon's education system. On March 12,
2020, Oregon’s Governor ordered the closure of K-12 schools beginning March 16, consistent
with mitigation strategies recommended by the Oregon Health Authority and the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. This audit was in progress at the time of the school closures. As
a result, the audit team decided to focus the audit’s objective on work performed by ODE for the
High School Success program prior to the school closures.
We acknowledge that the pandemic will likely continue to bring about changes to Oregon’s
education system. The full economic impact of COVID-19 is unknown and may result in
reductions to the state’s education budget for the 2019-21 biennium and beyond. We recognize
that these changes may influence ODE's ability to respond to the report’s findings and
recommendations.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 7
Audit Results
Staff in ODE’s High School Success program worked deliberately to implement Measure 98. They
developed robust guidance, held planning and approval workshops around the state, and
engaged ODE staff from other departments. Ultimately, 230 recipients developed plans to meet
state and local goals in compliance with statute and ODE’s equity focus. High School Success
program staff also conducted monitoring visits and reviewed and approved changes to plans
requested by districts and charter schools throughout the year.
Although the plan development and approval process was robust, the process to approve mid-
year change requests focused on statutory compliance and did not include a review of how
requested changes may affect expected local outcomes. In addition, the evaluation plan for the
High School Success program does not include goals, targets, timelines, and performance
measures against which to review local plan changes and differentiate the effect of Measure 98
from other initiatives to improve high school graduation rates. Additional equity analyses for the
program overall could help ODE staff demonstrate the program’s contributions to statewide
equity efforts.
The High School Success team facilitated an effective plan development
process
The High School Success team supported districts and charter schools effectively through the
plan development, application, and change process. The team developed tools and processes to
guide their internal work, communicate that work to others, and assist districts and charter
schools. The team also involved staff from other ODE programs to increase cross-office
coordination and ease programmatic burdens on recipients.
The team laid a solid foundation for the program’s implementation
ODE staff used an effective approach when they implemented the High School Success program.
They developed a project charter and identified relevant metrics. They created a monitoring
plan, a draft internal performance plan, steps for auditing expenditures, and additional tools to
guide and standardize their work. Education specialists were assigned, by region, to support
program recipients, and the team set up an online tool through which districts and charter
schools applied for the funds.
The High School Success team also developed tools and guidance to help applicants meet
planning and eligibility requirements. These tools included a self-assessment rubric, a plan
template, and plan change instructions. The self-assessment was completed by districts and
charter schools prior to writing their plans to examine the health of their education systems.
Applicants looked at many aspects of their operations, including whether they had set aside time
for teacher collaboration to review students’ progress, if they were monitoring equitable
assignment to courses, and their work developing community partnerships.
ODE offered workshops around the state for plan development and approval
Districts and charter schools could develop their High School Success plans on their own or
during the optional first day of the two-day regional workshops that the High School Success
team held. Sixteen workshops were held around the state, including as far south as Medford, to
the east in Malheur County, at the coast in Coos Bay, in Redmond and The Dalles, and urban
centers of Portland and Salem.
Prior to writing their plans, districts and charter schools were given baseline data sheets that
showed how they were performing on key performance measures, such as the four-year
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 8
graduation rate, broken down by various student populations. The optional first day of the
workshop gave recipients the time and space to write their plans. The template for these plans
required recipients to specify goals and activities for their selected areas of focus and to state
how they were going to address equity.
Attendance on the second day of the regional workshops was required of all recipients, who
broke into small groups with local peers from similar-sized districts and presented their plans to
each other for feedback. Also on the second day, High School Success staff met with recipients
one-on-one to review the plans and either offer approval or point out changes that were needed.
The High School Success team staff reviewed the proposed plans for statutory compliance and
evidence of intentional attention to equity. The High School Success team has made deliberate
efforts to involve staff from other ODE programs to increase collaboration and reduce
programmatic burdens on recipients.
The High School Success team deserves credit for involving staff from other ODE programs to
improve cross-office collaboration and create efficiencies for districts and charter schools. The
team is modeling how to break down silos and improve communication within the agency,
which ODE has been asked to address in past audit reports.
Staff from other ODE programs participated in the early stages of the High School Success
program in several ways. Initially, the High School Success team invited personnel from 15
different ODE teams or groups to an early internal meeting at which the team presented their
plan and scheduled visits with districts and charter schools.
Interested staff from the following nine ODE teams or units attended regional planning meetings
and monitoring visits:
• District and School Effectiveness;
• Secondary/Post-Secondary Transitions;
• Alternative Education;
• Every Day Matters;
• Youth Corrections Education Program;
• Juvenile Detention Education Program;
• Programs & Practices;
• College and Career Readiness; and
• Indian Education.
One High School Success team member also serves as a liaison to the Higher Education
Coordinating Commission and the Regional Promise program.
The High School Success team and other ODE program staff benefited from the cross-office
collaboration. The High School Success education specialists told us that staff from other teams
brought useful perspectives and existing local relationships to their work. They also provided
the team with information and conducted analyses for them on specific topics. In turn,
participation in the workshops and monitoring visits gave staff from other teams the
opportunity to interact with, and ask questions of, local recipients.
5 Oregon Audits Division, Oregon Department of Education Should Take Further Steps to Help Districts and High Schools Increase
Oregon's Graduation Rate, December 2017, Report 2017-29.
Oregon Audits Division, Stronger Accountability, Oversight, and Support Would Improve Results for Academically At-Risk Students in
Alternative and Online Education, December 2017, Report 2017-30.
Oregon Audits Division, Department of Education and Portland Public Schools: Must Do More to Monitor Spending and Address
Systemic Obstacles to Student Performance, Particularly at Struggling Schools, January 2019, Report 2019-01.
Oregon Audits Division, ODE Can Better Support Students Experiencing Disabilities Through Improved Coordination and Monitoring of
Services, June 2020, Report 2020-24.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 9
For example, ODE’s Alternative Education coordinator had the opportunity to visit alternative
education programs in the state and to speak with other ODE staff who work with them.
Additionally, the High School Success team is working with the team overseeing the Perkins V
grant to align CTE objectives and reduce the work recipients are required to do to support both
programs. Staff outside the High School Success program praised the team for their continuous
improvement orientation and said they would like to see the process replicated within other
parts of the agency.
Feedback from a recipient satisfaction survey can improve future plan development cycles
The High School Success team asked recipients to evaluate the workshops using a satisfaction
survey, which garnered 105 responses. We analyzed the survey’s results and comments and
found a very high level of satisfaction with the workshops. Over 90% of the participants agreed
or strongly agreed that the plan approval session, and the support they received from ODE staff,
was helpful. Over 90% also appreciated the regional approach and would like to see the same
process repeated in the future.
With such a high level of satisfaction, the High School
Success team may not need to change their approach to the
two-day workshops. We did, however, examine themes
across responses to the question asking recipients for
suggestions to improve the process.
Most commonly, recipients asked the team to clarify, in
advance, the workshop’s expectations and process, and they
suggested new tools to help them understand those
expectations, the self-assessment, budget, and planning
process. The suggested tools included a one-page document
describing the work of other recipients, a tutorial for the
self-assessment, and a webinar in advance of the
workshop’s planning day.
Reducing constraints on staff time can improve the review process for
requested plan changes, recipient monitoring, and program evaluation
After the planning process concluded and High School Success plans were approved, recipients
were able to request changes to their plans as their spending needs changed. The High School
Success team reviewed the changes for statutory compliance, but the review did not include an
evaluation of how changes were expected to affect local outcomes. The High School Success team
is small and they spend time providing technical assistance to recipients who are sometimes
unable to access the systems to request changes. Without their own performance measures, the
team also has difficulty demonstrating how their work to implement Measure 98 contributes to
statewide successes in improving graduation rates.
ODE staff reviewed change requests for statutory compliance but did not evaluate the
impact of changes on expected local outcomes
After High School Success plans were developed and approved, recipients could request changes
throughout the year. The High School Success team has procedures for reviewing and approving
changes that ensure the recipient is still in compliance with statute, but for the time period
reviewed during this audit, these procedures did not include a step to look at how the changes
were expected to affect the recipient’s planned outcomes. Below are examples of changes that
have occurred and could warrant a review of how the requested changes could impact a
recipient’s original goals.
Participant comments about the
regional planning workshops
“This was wonderful, and we
learned a lot. This would be great
to do with other teams and grants.”
“I thought it was so great. I would
like something similar each year to
develop new ideas and assess what
we are doing.”
“Overall, I loved it, and I have done
this work for many years.”
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 10
• One school district planned on, and spent, award money in the dropout prevention
category, but the activities presented in the original plan were only tied to CTE.
• A second district overspent on middle school activities by approximately $24,000 when
only $1,000 had been budgeted, which likely required spending shifts from other
categories.
• A note was made by High School Success staff about a third district for which the
expenditure report did not match up with the plan in almost every area.
As part of plan development and approval, High School
Success staff and recipients discussed baseline levels for
indicators such as dropout and four-year graduation
rates. This helped recipients direct their award money
toward goals and activities that will improve these
indicators. In their plans, recipients set targets and timelines for the outcomes they hoped to
accomplish during the award period. They also submitted their anticipated expenditures in
allowable spending categories.
Recipients should work to achieve the outcomes approved during the initial planning process.
Adding a step to evaluate the impact of changes on expected outcomes would close the loop in
the process that began with a review between High School Success staff and local recipients
about indicators needing improvement.
The High School Success team experiences constraints in several areas
Within the High School Success team, five education specialists cover 230 recipients. Their work
is supplemented by a research analyst, a program analyst, and an administrative specialist.
Because of the large number of recipients, the team’s research analyst, who has 18 years of data
analysis experience, is assisting with recipient support work. As a result, the team is missing
opportunities to perform larger program analyses, such as calculating educator equity gaps or
reviewing data on High School Success initiatives that affect alternative schools and programs,
which experience some of the lowest graduation rates in the state.
Local recipients submit their expense claims electronically through ODE’s E-Grant Management
System, a centralized, uniform electronic grant system used to monitor recipients’ spending. We
heard that, while this system is adequate for what it needs to do, it is slow and archaic. The team
lead runs most of the E-Grant Management System claims and fields issues about those claims
from teammates, who are constantly going through expenditure reports.
The High School Success Team uses a second system, SurveyMonkey Apply, for recipients’ grant
applications, assessments, and expenditure reporting. ODE has a contract with SurveyMonkey
Apply for its use. Recipients have had difficulties using SurveyMonkey Apply, including being
unable to access the system, which requires High School Success staff to provide technical
support and, in some cases, enter the requests themselves.
The difficulties created by each of these systems constrain staff time, reducing the amount of
time they are able to spend on their primary goals. ODE is planning a replacement for the E-
Grant Management System, but that replacement is not expected soon and may not fully meet
the program’s needs.
CTE concentrators are more likely to
graduate high school than their peers
at rates above the state average.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 11
Although the High School Success program is planned well, the team may have difficulties
measuring impact
The High School Success team’s internal performance evaluation plan is currently in draft form
and should be formalized. Without a formally documented plan, the team’s direction and goals
can shift with changing leadership. The High School Success program has experienced high
leadership turnover since its inception, which makes it difficult to maintain a strong and
consistent strategy that can be shared within the agency and across local recipients.
The draft plan focuses on process
measures (e.g., documentation of
site visits, approved plans, executed
grant agreements) and does not
include state-level goals, targets,
timelines, and performance
measures for evaluating interim
outcomes. Without these, it will be
difficult for the program to capture
the work of local recipients and
demonstrate its value to the public.
For example, stakeholders will likely
want to know how many new CTE
teachers were hired across the state
with the funds and whether more
historically marginalized students
are taking advanced courses to earn college credit as a result of the program’s efforts. State-level
goals, targets, and timelines could serve as benchmarks against which the High School Success
team could evaluate changes requested by recipients to their local plans.
In addition, without program-specific outcome measures, it will be difficult to differentiate the
effect of Measure 98 and the High School Success program from that of other initiatives working
to improve graduation rates. These initiatives include any that might be funded in the future by
the Student Success Act, ODE’s current work on chronic absenteeism and its Early Indicator and
Intervention System, and the existing CTE and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math hubs
around the state. Graduation rates in the state have improved recently, but the team will not be
able to point to the specific effect of its efforts on that success without its own measures. The
analysis of robust data will be key to measuring the program’s effect.
The High School Success team looks at detailed equity data at the recipient
level, but is limited in its ability to conduct higher-level equity analyses
In Oregon and nationally, historically and traditionally marginalized students graduate at lower
rates from high school than their peers. The Every Student Succeeds Act requires measures of
student progress to be examined within each state, local education agency, and school. Oregon
education agencies do so by examining key indicators, such as high school graduation and
dropout rates by various student groups. Future ODE reports will evaluate whether historically
marginalized students have equitable access to experienced, effective teachers. Until the agency
does so, the High School Success team could further its equity work by asking local recipients to
look at this issue. The team could also prioritize the work of its research analyst to advance
programmatic and equity goals.
Students participate in an agriculture CTE program in Monument, Oregon.
Source: ODE.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 12
Data access barriers impose limits on the High School Success team’s ability to identify
equity barriers, schools needing support, and promising approaches among recipients
The High School Success team compiles data reports that are shared with districts and charter
schools during monitoring site visits. These summaries present key outcome measures broken
down by student groups for each district or school. Additional data held by the district or school
is also reviewed during these visits, and both sets of information are used to discuss what is
being done to ensure equity in the recipient’s High School Success-funded activities.
The High School Success team, however, experiences barriers to data collection and analysis that
hinder the examination of programmatic and equity goals. For instance, ODE annually receives
student-level enrollment data, such as basic demographic information, from school districts and
charter schools, but the agency cannot see how students have performed in their courses.
Because some data is held by individual districts and schools, the team also cannot easily
aggregate that information across participants. In addition, as was noted in a previous audit,
basic information about alternative schools and programs continues to be limited.6 Alternative
and online schools accounted for about 10% of Oregon’s public high school enrollment in the
2015-16 school year, but nearly half of the state’s high school dropouts.
These limitations prevent the High School Success team from conducting analyses that might
more precisely diagnose equity barriers for specific student populations. Additional equity
analyses could also aid the identification of recipients needing targeted support, allowing the
team’s education specialists to more efficiently conduct monitoring visits. Without the necessary
data, the team may also be missing opportunities to identify and share promising, evidence-
based approaches among recipients.
The High School Success team is developing a plan to evaluate internal program performance,
but this plan focuses on process, such as the number of visits made, and not interim or long-term
outcomes like the change in dropout prevention activities conducted as a result of program
funds. ODE’s Office of Education Innovation and Improvement, in which the High School Success
program sits, is working on a long-term vision for the office to help guide programmatic
objectives and consistent monitoring and evaluation tools from an agency level. Until that vision
is realized, expanding the internal plan to include outcome objectives, targets, timelines, and
data measures could provide direction for the collection and analysis of data that will further
programmatic and equity goals.
The High School Success team could better align with larger ODE equity initiatives
The High School Success team thoughtfully applied ODE’s equity lens to recipients’ self-
assessments, plan development, and application processes. The team could further enhance
their work by aligning their equity analyses with larger ODE initiatives.
For example, the state’s 2015 Equitable Access to Educators plan identified recruitment and
retention of educators, particularly educators of color, as Oregon’s primary equity gap. The High
School Success program’s self-assessment rubric asks recipients whether CTE teachers in newly
created or expanded programs are appropriately licensed or endorsed, but it does not ask them
to look at the quality of educators teaching historically marginalized students. The state is also
focusing on preparing teachers and administrators for success in racially and linguistically
diverse classrooms, which the self-assessment tool does not address.
6 Oregon Audits Division, Stronger Accountability, Oversight, and Support Would Improve Results for Academically At-Risk Students in
Alternative and Online Education, December 2017, Report 2017-30.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 13
The Every Student Succeeds Act asks states to examine and publish educator equity gaps, which
reflect whether low-income and minority children are served at disproportionate rates by
inexperienced or ineffective educators or those teaching out of their field. ODE has not publicly
reported updated analyses since 2017. ODE expects to update this information in their next
Educator Equity report. Until the agency can provide the High School Success team with this
information for each school district, the team might consider asking recipients to look at
educator equity gaps independently.
ODE’s continuous improvement process asks local education agencies to reflect on whether they
are identifying and removing barriers to advancement, participation, and opportunity and
replacing those barriers with inclusive and equitable practices. The High School Success team
has an opportunity to conduct equity analyses to align with ODE’s larger equity initiatives.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 14
Recommendations
To foster improvements in monitoring and analysis, we recommend ODE and the High School
Success team:
1. Include in the annual expenditure review process, and in future plan development and
approval processes, a review of past planned and actual expenditures, and the impact of
mid-year changes on expected outcomes.
2. Include in the change approval process and rubric a review of expected changes to local
outcomes.
3. Document the most time-consuming technical difficulties for High School Success
program staff and recipients and create a plan to minimize them.
4. Develop goals, targets, timelines, and data measures for the High School Success
program in the final internal program evaluation plan.
5. Use data from ODE and from site visits in higher-level analyses to further program and
equity goals and to align with larger ODE initiatives.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-44 | December 2020 | Page 15
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
Objective
This audit was required by Measure 98, which called for financial and performance audits of the
program every two years. The Oregon Audits Division released a financial audit of the program
in May 2020.
The objective of this performance audit was to determine whether ODE has sufficient processes
to ensure that:
• The agency can provide sufficient support for districts through their planning process.
• Adjustments to district plans after initial approval do not negatively affect expected
district outcomes.
• The agency is able to determine whether districts are operating according to the equity
lens.
Scope
This audit was a review of ODE’s process used to approve districts High School Success plans for
statutory compliance, including examining a sample of approved plans, and a review of ODE’s
system for monitoring the use of funds and analyzing district outcomes for overall effectiveness
and equity. We excluded activities that occurred after the Governor issued a stay-at-home order
on March 23, 2020. In deference to the increased burden in response to COVID-19, our audit
does not rely on interviews with, or information requested from, schools or districts that ODE
does not already collect.
Methodology
To address our objectives, we used a methodology that included, but was not limited to:
conducting interviews, analyzing educational data, reviewing documentation and evaluating the
effectiveness of internal controls.
Within ODE, we met with the Chief of Staff, an assistant superintendent, the Director of the High
School Success team, education program specialists, and research and policy analysts. We also
conducted interviews with state legislators. To learn about the views, opinions, and perspectives
of stakeholders, we interviewed representatives from Stand for Children, the Oregon Education
Association, the NAACP of Eugene and Springfield, and the Chalkboard Project.
We assessed internal controls significant to the audit objective surrounding implementation of
the Measure 98 by reviewing federal laws, Oregon state laws, ODE’s policies, procedures, and
administrative rules, and previous audit reports. We reviewed types of equity data collected and
used in other states. We also requested and analyzed education data, planning and monitoring
documentation, and guidance documentation from ODE.
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We sincerely appreciate the courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of
ODE and other stakeholders during the course of this audit.
Oregon achieves . . . together!
Colt Gill
Director of the Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
December 10, 2020
Kip Memmott, Director
Secretary of State, Audits Division
255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Salem, OR 97310
Dear Mr. Memmott,
This letter provides a written response to the Audits Division’s final draft audit report titled: High School
Success Planning is Robust, but ODE Can Enhance Benefits of Measure 98 by Improving Monitoring and
Analysis.
Thank you for highlighting the important work under way at the Oregon Department of Education (ODE)
to improve graduation rates, increase 9th grade on-track rates, and improve college and career
readiness across the state. The recommendations offered will aid in our continuous improvement
efforts and increase our effectiveness as we partner with High School Success recipients to help more
students on their path to graduation and beyond.
We appreciate that the Audits Division staff spent time on this topic, raised issues, and provided
thoughtful recommendations to further our work. Many of the themes in the audit are consistent with
what we have identified, and we look forward to acting on the recommendations to move our work
forward.
Additionally, ODE has focused, and will continue to focus, on opportunity gaps evident in the data.
Below is our detailed response to each recommendation in the audit.
RECOMMENDATION 1
Include in the annual expenditure review process, and in future plan development and
approval processes, a review of past planned and actual expenditures, and the impact of
mid-year changes on expected outcomes.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
December 31, 2021
Maggie Mashia
maggie.mahshia@ode.state.or.us
Narrative for Recommendation 1
As part of our continuous improvement process, the High School Success team will refine annual
expenditure reviews processes and plan development/approval processes to include a review of past
planned vs. actual expenditures, as well as an analysis of the impact of mid-year changes on expected
outcomes. In order to respond to this recommendation, we will add specific and intentional steps in
both processes to ensure analysis of the impact on expected outcomes is done both internally as a
whole, as well as externally with our recipients.
RECOMMENDATION 2
Include in the change approval process and rubric a review of expected changes to local
outcomes.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
August 31, 2021
Maggie Mashia
maggie.mahshia@ode.state.or.us
Narrative for Recommendation 2
Building on our current processes and an existing rubric, the High School Success team will add
intentional steps and questions to review expected changes to local outcomes when recipients request
to change their plan and budget.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
RECOMMENDATION 3
Document the most time-consuming technical difficulties for High School Success program
staff and recipients and create a plan to minimize them.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
June 30, 2021
Maggie Mashia
maggie.mahshia@ode.state.or.us
Narrative for Recommendation 3
The High School Success program staff will document technical issues experienced throughout the
biennial cycle (planning, expenditure report reviews, grant management responsibilities, site visits,
monitoring experiences, etc). Once documentation is complete, the program staff will analyze the data
to determine which of these technical difficulties are the most time-consuming. Then, the program staff
will explore options and will submit a plan of resolution to the Assistant Superintendent of the Office of
Education Innovation and Improvement
RECOMMENDATION 4
Develop goals, targets, timelines, and data measures for the High School Success program
in the final internal program evaluation plan.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
December 31, 2020
Maggie Mashia
maggie.mahshia@ode.state.or.us
Narrative for Recommendation 4
The High School Success program staff will document internal performance measures. Once finalized,
we will share those measures with appropriate agency staff.  In addition to internal performance
measures, the HSS team has publicly released Eligibility Requirement Guidance and further outlined
expectations for HSS grant recipients since the time of this audit.
Oregon Department of Education
255 Capitol St NE, Salem, OR 97310  |  Voice: 503-947-5600  | Fax: 503-378-5156  |  www.oregon.gov/ode
RECOMMENDATION 5
Use data from ODE and from site visits in higher-level analyses to further program and
equity goals and to align with larger ODE initiatives.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number of
specific point of contact for
implementation
Agree
August 31, 2021
Maggie Mashia
maggie.mahshia@ode.state.or.us
Narrative for Recommendation 5
The High School Success team has begun work to align this program with other ODE initiatives. We plan
to use data collected in the program to guide us in developing and implementing program and equity
goals.
Please contact Scott Nine at (503) 947-0612 with any questions.
Sincerely,
Colt Gill
Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction
Director of the Oregon Department of
Education
Audit Team
Andrew Love, CFE, Audit Manager
Krystine McCants, CIA, MS Econ., Senior Auditor
Kathy Scott, DrPH, Staff Auditor
Karin Bryant, CPA, Staff Auditor
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of Public
Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected Secretary of State and is
independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon government.
The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards and commissions as well as
administer municipal audit law.
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500 | Salem | OR | 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits