Secretary of State Bev Clarno
Audits Division Director Kip Memmott
s
Fiscal Year 2019
Statewide Single Audit Report
March 2020
Report 2020-14
Office of the Secretary of State  Audits Division
Bev Clarno  Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State  Director
Jeff Morgan  255 Capitol Street NE, Suite 500
Interim Deputy Secretary of State          Salem, OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
-i-
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
We have conducted a statewide audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit requirements of Title 2
U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and
Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). This report encompasses the year ended
June 30, 2019, and is required for the State to continue receiving federal financial assistance, which, as
shown in this report, totals approximately $12 billion.
As required by the Single Audit Act, we issued a report dated December 19, 2019, on the State of
Oregon’s financial statements. That report was included in the State of Oregon’s Comprehensive Annual
Financial Report for the year ended June 30, 2019.
This report contains components required by the Single Audit Act to be reported by the auditor:
 Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an
Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With Government Auditing Standards. This
component contains our report on the State of Oregon’s internal control over financial reporting and
compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts and award agreements that affect the
financial statements. Part of the schedule of findings and questioned costs relates to this report.
 Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program; Report on Internal Control over Compliance;
and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance. This
component contains our report on the State of Oregon’s compliance with the requirements applicable
to each of its major federal programs as described in the OMB Compliance Supplement and internal
controls over compliance. Part of the schedule of findings and questioned costs relates to this report.
This component also contains our report on the State of Oregon’s schedule of expenditures of federal
awards for the year ended June 30, 2019.
 Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs. This schedule lists seven current year audit findings
regarding internal control related to financial reporting. It also lists 16 current year audit findings
regarding compliance with the requirements of major federal programs and related internal controls,
and one finding related to finding follow-up of a non-major program.
Uniform Guidance requires management to provide a plan of corrective action on the findings and
recommendations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. Management’s response and planned
corrective actions are included in this schedule. We did not audit management’s response, and
accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
This report also contains components required by the Single Audit Act to be reported by the State of
Oregon:
-ii-
 Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards. This schedule is not a required part of the State of
Oregon's financial statements, but is required by Uniform Guidance. The schedule shows the State of
Oregon’s expenditures of federal awards, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, excluding Oregon
State University, Oregon Health and Science University, University of Oregon, Portland State
University, Western Oregon University, Southern Oregon University, Oregon Institute of Technology,
and Eastern Oregon University. The notes, which accompany the schedule, are considered an integral
part of the schedule. They provide disclosures regarding the basis of presentation used in preparing
the schedule, the reporting entity, the value of federal awards expended in the form of non-cash
assistance, unemployment insurance and the calculation of expenditures for the Revolving Loan Fund
Grant (RLF, CFDA 11.307).
 Schedule of Prior Year Findings. This schedule lists the current status of prior year findings that
remained uncorrected at the end of fiscal year 2018.
We concluded that the state’s financial statements are fairly presented in conformance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles, resulting in an unmodified opinion. We issued a qualified opinion on
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and unmodified opinions on all other major federal
programs.
The courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of the State of Oregon during the
course of this audit were commendable and sincerely appreciated.
State of Oregon
-iii-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORTS:
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on
Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in
Accordance with Government Auditing Standards ....................................................................................1
Independent Auditor’s Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program; Report on
Internal Control over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal
Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance ................................................................................................3
SCHEDULE OF FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS:
Summary of Auditor’s Results ................................................................................................................................7
Financial Statement Findings ..................................................................................................................................9
Federal Awards Findings and Questioned Costs ........................................................................................... 15
SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS:
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards ................................................................................................. 41
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards ....................................................................... 66
SCHEDULE OF PRIOR YEAR FINDINGS:
Prior Year Financial Statement Findings .......................................................................................................... 68
Prior Year Federal Award Findings and Questioned Costs ....................................................................... 78
Appendix A:   Summaries of Related Audit Reports
Issued by the Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division ......... ……………………………………….…… 102
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Bev Clarno Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Jeff Morgan 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Interim Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
-1-
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With
Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the governmental
activities, the business-type activities, the aggregate discretely presented component units, each major
fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the State of Oregon as of and for the year ended
June 30, 2019, and the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the State of
Oregon’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated December 19, 2019.
Our report includes a reference to other auditors who audited the financial statements of the Common
School Fund and the Public Employees Retirement System, as described in our report on the State of
Oregon’s financial statements. This report includes our consideration of the results of the other auditors’
testing of internal control over financial reporting and compliance and other matters that are reported
on separately by those other auditors. However, this report, insofar as it relates to the results of the
other auditors, is based solely on the reports of the other auditors.
Other auditors also audited the financial statements of the following discretely presented component
units: SAIF Corporation, University of Oregon, Oregon State University, Portland State University,
Western Oregon University, and Oregon Health and Science University, as described in our report on the
State of Oregon’s financial statements. This report does not include the results of the other auditors’
testing of internal control over financial reporting or compliance and other matters that are reported on
separately by those auditors.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the State of Oregon’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) to determine the audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements,
but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the State of Oregon’s internal
control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the State of Oregon’s internal
control.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the preceding paragraph
and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material weaknesses
or significant deficiencies and therefore, material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that
have not been identified. However, as described in the accompanying schedule of findings and
questioned costs, we identified seven deficiencies in internal control that we consider material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies.
-2-
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or
detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material
misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a
timely basis. We consider the deficiency described in the accompanying schedule of findings and
questioned costs as item 2019-001, to be a material weakness.
A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less
severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with
governance. We consider the deficiencies described in the accompanying schedule of findings and
questioned costs as items 2019-002 through 2019-007, to be significant deficiencies.
Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the State of Oregon's financial statements are
free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and
material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. However, providing an opinion on
compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express
such an opinion. The results of our tests and those of the other auditors disclosed no instances of
noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
The State of Oregon’s Response to Findings
The State of Oregon’s response to the findings identified in our audit is described in the accompanying
schedule of findings and questioned costs. The State of Oregon’s response was not subjected to the
auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and, accordingly, we express no
opinion on it.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in
accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s internal control and
compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
December 19, 2019
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Bev Clarno Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Jeff Morgan 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Interim Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
-3-
Independent Auditor’s Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program; Report on
Internal Control over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
Required by the Uniform Guidance
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program
We have audited the State of Oregon’s compliance with the types of compliance requirements described
in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on each of the State of
Oregon’s major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 2019. The State of Oregon’s major federal
programs are identified in the summary of auditor’s results section of the accompanying schedule of
findings and questioned costs.
The State of Oregon’s basic financial statements include the operations of the universities in the table
below, which expended approximately $1,435 million in federal awards and are not included in the
State of Oregon’s schedule of expenditures of federal awards for the year ended June 30, 2019. Our
audit, described below, did not include the operations of the universities because the component units
engaged other auditors to perform an audit of compliance. To obtain a copy of those reports, please
refer to note disclosure 1 of the schedule of expenditures of federal awards.
Component Unit Federal Expenditures
Oregon State University $ 421 million
Oregon Health and Science University $ 402 million
University of Oregon $ 277 million
Portland State University $ 206 million
Western Oregon University $ 46 million
Southern Oregon University $ 35 million
Oregon Institute of Technology $ 25 million
Eastern Oregon University $ 23 million
Management’s Responsibility
Management is responsible for compliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and
conditions of its federal awards applicable to its federal programs.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on compliance for each of the State of Oregon’s major federal
programs based on our audit of the types of compliance requirements referred to above. We conducted
our audit of compliance in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards,
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit requirements of Title 2 U.S. Code of
Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). Those standards and the Uniform Guidance
-4-
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
noncompliance with the types of compliance requirements referred to above that could have a direct
and material effect on a major federal program occurred. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence about the State of Oregon’s compliance with those requirements and performing such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our qualified and unmodified opinions on
compliance for major federal programs. However, our audit does not provide a legal determination of
the State of Oregon’s compliance.
Basis for Qualified Opinion on Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
As described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs, the State of Oregon did not
comply with requirements as listed in the table below. Compliance with such requirements is necessary,
in our opinion, for the State of Oregon to comply with the requirements applicable to that program.
CFDA #   Program (or Cluster) Name  Finding # Compliance Requirement
93.558  Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF)
2019-008
2019-009
Reporting
Special Tests and Provisions
Qualified Opinion on Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
In our opinion, except for the noncompliance described in the Basis for Qualified Opinion paragraph, the
State of Oregon complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance requirements referred to
above that could have a direct and material effect on Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
for the year ended June 30, 2019.
Unmodified Opinion on Each of the Other Major Federal Programs
In our opinion, the State of Oregon complied, in all material respects, with the types of compliance
requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its other major
federal programs identified in the summary of auditor’s results section of the accompanying schedule of
findings and questioned costs for the year ended June 30, 2019.
Other Matters
The results of our auditing procedures disclosed other instances of noncompliance, which are required
to be reported in accordance with the Uniform Guidance and are described in the accompanying
schedule of findings and questioned costs as items 2019-010, 2019-012, 2019-016, 2019-019, 2019-021
through 2019-023. Our opinion on each major federal program is not modified with respect to these
matters.
Uniform Guidance requires auditors to follow up on prior year findings and report current year findings
when known questioned costs are greater than $25,000 for a program that is not audited as a major
program. Finding 2019-017, as described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned
costs, identified noncompliance and questioned costs for the Foster Care program, a non-major
program, on which we express no opinion.
The State of Oregon’s response to the noncompliance findings identified in our audit is described in the
accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs. The State of Oregon’s response was not
subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and, accordingly, we express no
opinion on the response.
-5-
The State of Oregon is responsible for preparing a corrective action plan to address each audit finding
included in our auditor’s report. The State of Oregon’s corrective action plan was not subjected to the
auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and, accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
Report on Internal Control over Compliance
Management of the State of Oregon is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal
control over compliance with the types of compliance requirements referred to above. In planning and
performing our audit of compliance, we considered the State of Oregon’s internal control over
compliance with the types of requirements that could have a direct and material effect on each major
federal program to determine the auditing procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the
purpose of expressing an opinion on compliance for each major federal program and to test and report
on internal control over compliance in accordance with the Uniform Guidance, but not for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over compliance. Accordingly, we do not
express an opinion on the effectiveness of the State of Oregon’s internal control over compliance.
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the
preceding paragraph and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control over
compliance that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies and therefore, material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified. However, as discussed below,
we did identify certain deficiencies in internal control over compliance that we consider to be material
weaknesses and significant deficiencies.
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over
compliance does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their
assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program on a timely basis. A material weakness in internal control over
compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance, such
that there is a reasonable possibility that material noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis. We
consider the deficiencies in internal control over compliance described in the accompanying schedule of
findings and questioned costs as items 2019-008, 2019-009, 2019-013, 2019-014, and 2019-021 to be
material weaknesses.
A significant deficiency in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal control over compliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program that is less severe than a material weakness in internal control over compliance, yet important
enough to merit attention by those charged with governance. We consider the deficiencies in internal
control over compliance described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs as
items 2019-010 through 2019-012, 2019-015, 2019-016, 2019-018 through 2019-020, and 2019-022
through 2019-024 to be significant deficiencies.
The State of Oregon’s response to the internal control over compliance findings identified in our audit is
described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs. The State of Oregon’s
response was not subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and,
accordingly, we express no opinion on the response.
The State of Oregon is responsible for preparing a corrective action plan to address each audit finding
included in our auditor’s report. The State of Oregon’s corrective action plan was not subjected to the
auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and, accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
The purpose of this report on internal control over compliance is solely to describe the scope of our
testing of internal control over compliance and the results of that testing based on the requirements of
the Uniform Guidance. Accordingly, this report is not suitable for any other purpose.
-6-
Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance
We have audited the financial statements of the governmental activities, the business-type activities, the
aggregate discretely presented component units, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund
information of the State of Oregon as of and for the year ended June 30, 2019, and the related notes to
the financial statements, which collectively comprise the State of Oregon’s basic financial statements.
We issued our report thereon dated December 19, 2019, which contained unmodified opinions on those
financial statements. Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial
statements that collectively comprise the basic financial statements. The accompanying schedule of
expenditures of federal awards is presented for purposes of additional analysis as required by the
Uniform Guidance and is not a required part of the basic financial statements. Such information is the
responsibility of management and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying accounting
and other records used to prepare the basic financial statements. The information has been subjected to
the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and certain additional
procedures, including comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting
and other records used to prepare the basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements
themselves, and other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted
in the United States of America. In our opinion, the schedule of expenditures of federal awards is fairly
stated in all material respects in relation to the basic financial statements as a whole.
State of Oregon
March 6, 2020, except for our report on the Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards, for which the date is December 19, 2019
-7-
State of Oregon
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
Section I—Summary of Auditor’s Results
Financial Statements
Type of auditor’s report issued:  Unmodified
Internal control over financial reporting:
Material weaknesses identified?  yes  no
Significant deficiencies identified that are
not considered to be material weaknesses?  yes  none reported
Noncompliance material to financial statements
noted?  yes  no
Federal Awards
Internal control over major programs:
Material weaknesses identified?  yes  no
Significant deficiencies identified that are
not considered to be material weaknesses?  yes  none reported
Type of auditor’s report issued on compliance Qualified:
for major programs:  TANF Cluster
Unmodified:
All Other Major Programs
Any audit findings disclosed that are required
to be reported in accordance with 2 CFR 200.516(a)?  yes  no
-8-
Identification of Major Programs
CFDA# Name of Federal Program or Cluster
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Projects
16.575 Crime Victim Assistance
93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements
93.659 Adoption Assistance
93.788 Opioid STR
97.046 Fire Management Assistance Grant
cluster Food Distribution Cluster
cluster Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
cluster Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Cluster
cluster Medicaid Cluster
Dollar threshold used to distinguish between
type A and type B programs:  $30,000,000
Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee?  yes  no
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-9-
Section II – Financial Statement Findings
Management Responses were not subjected to auditing procedures.
2019-001 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Ensure Accrual Methodologies are Complete
Material Weakness
State accounting polices require management to develop control activities to ensure that
transactions entered in the state’s accounting system are properly calculated and properly
classified in the accounts. To ensure expenditure balances are complete, a calculation is made to
estimate the amount of expenditures to accrue that occurred at year-end but are not yet reported in
the accounting system. Management generally uses methodologies to calculate accruals that return
a reasonable estimate.
During our review, we found four incomplete expenditure accruals; one was not completed as there
was no methodology, and three were due to incomplete methodologies used for calculating the
estimates.
The errors resulted in the following misstatements:
 Expenditures were overstated and Due from Other Funds were understated by $35 million
in the Health and Social Services Fund, while expenditures and Due to Other Funds in the
General Fund were understated by the same amount;
 Internal Services Fund expenditures and related Accounts Payable were understated by
$15.1 million;
 Expenditures and Accounts Payable were understated by $7.4 million and Accounts
Receivable and Federal Revenue were understated by $5.5 million in the Health and Social
Services Fund; while General Fund expenditures and Accounts Payable were understated by
$4.4 million; and
 Expenditures and Due to Other Funds were overstated by $2.8 million in the Health and
Social Services Fund, while expenditures were understated and Due from Other Funds were
overstated by the same amount in the General Fund.
We recommend department management ensure year-end accrual methodologies are complete
and include consideration of all relevant expenditures.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action:   The Office of Financial Services will update accrual methodology instructions to
review all estimates to ensure they are calculated correctly and include consideration of all relevant
expenditures. We will engage more closely with budget staff on projections of biennium-end
expenditures to ensure alignment of expenditures and accrual estimates.
Anticipated Completion Date:  March 31, 2020
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-10-
2019-002 Department of Administrative Services
Ensure a Complete Review of SFMA D23 Fund Profiles
Significant Deficiency
D23 fund profiles determine how an agency’s funds are accounted for and recorded in the state’s
financial statements. These profiles are defined by individual agencies, but are centrally maintained
by Statewide Financial Management Services (SFMS) personnel within the department.
SFMS has established procedures to ensure D23 fund profiles are set up to provide reasonable
assurance that transactions will be properly recorded. These procedures include a final review by
State Accounting and Reporting Services (SARS) over three key fields:  GAAP Fund, GASB 54
Indicator, and GASB 54 Description. An incorrect GAAP fund or GASB 54 indicator could impact
financial reporting at the agency level and in the state’s financial statements. Incorrect or
incomplete GASB 54 descriptions could potentially result in transactions being posted to an
incorrect D23 fund.
We reviewed a sample of 36 new and updated D23 fund profiles and noted six instances in which
the final review by SARS was not obtained. A retroactive review by SARS determined that one of the
six profiles did not have the correct description in the GASB 54 Description field.
Although the department has processes in place to review D23 fund profiles prior to their
activation, all procedures were not followed consistently.
We recommend department management ensure all established internal control policies are
followed when setting up and maintaining D23 fund profiles to ensure accounting transactions
within agency funds are accurately and properly recorded.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
SFMS acknowledges that the SARS approval was omitted in the six instances that the auditor reviewed.
We have inserted a step in our procedures to verify that an email is sent to SARS prior to approving the
D23 request. We believe it would be unlikely that an agency would select the D23 fund based on the
GASB54 description. The GASB54 description is secondary to the D23 fund title. The GASB54 code and
description are used by SARS to ensure that the D23 fund is posting to equity correctly.
Anticipated Completion Date: August 22, 2019
2019-003 Department of Administrative Services
Ensure Change Management Controls over Data Testing and Validation are in Place for
Future Implementations to Workday
Significant Deficiency
Generally accepted information systems standards suggest effective change management controls
should be designed for successful implementation of new systems, ensuring reasonable assurance
over functionality and data reliability. Controls should include tests of data for conversion and
these tests and results should be documented and retained for an audit trail. Additionally, once
conversion is completed, validation testing should be performed to ensure data is converted
accurately and completely. This testing should also be documented and retained.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-11-
In February 2019, the department implemented Workday, a cloud-based human resource software
application, to replace its legacy system, PPDB. During our review of change management controls,
we noted the department had change management controls in place during the implementation of
Workday. However, data validation testing completed by the department over data for conversion
into Workday was not documented. When we made inquiries about this testing, we were told in
order to minimize the time between PPDB going down and Workday going live, the decision was
made not to document this testing. Additionally, after the conversion to Workday was completed,
final conversion testing performed to ensure the converted data was complete and accurate was
not documented. The department did not maintain this documentation as it contained personally
identifying information which would require additional effort to safeguard. Without
documentation, the department cannot provide assurance the converted data was complete and
accurate.
We performed data validation testing on selected fields in Workday to gain assurance that the data
converted accurately and completely. Based on our tests, we have reasonable assurance that the
data converted as intended.
We recommend department management ensure all data validation testing recommended by
generally accepted information system standards is performed for future changes to Workday and
testing plans and results are documented and retained.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
DAS will review the generally accepted information system standards to ensure understanding of
testing expectations for future Workday implementations. SOS expectations will be taken in to
consideration in all future Workday test plans.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 15, 2019
2019-004 Department of Administrative Services
Strengthen Controls over Dual Access to Workday and OSPA
Significant Deficiency
Effective segregation of duties is designed to prevent the possibility that a single individual could
have access to multiple critical functions in such a way that errors or misappropriations could
occur and not be detected timely. For example, an employee responsible for entering time for other
employees in a payroll system should not simultaneously have update access to the personnel
system where new employees are added, and base pay and adjustments to pay are recorded.
We performed procedures to determine if employees with update access to OSPA also had update
access to PPDB and Workday. We did not find any employees with dual update access to OSPA and
PPDB. However, we found four employees with simultaneous update access in OSPA and Workday.
With this access, these employees could have made unauthorized changes to the personnel and
payroll information systems. Department personnel revoked the conflicting OSPA/Workday update
access for each of these employees after becoming aware of the condition.
When Workday was implemented, not all employees with update access were given only the access
needed for their job responsibilities. In addition, DAS had not implemented a review process to
identify conflicting access.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-12-
We recommend department management develop and implement a process to review access to
Workday and OSPA to ensure ongoing segregation of duties between Workday and OSPA. Finally,
we recommend management review changes made by the four employees with dual update access
to ensure no unauthorized changes were made during the time they had update access to both
systems.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The dual access review process between Workday and OSPA was complete as of 8/16/2019. This
review process is currently completed daily and notification is sent to Workday stating if dual access
does or does not exist.
In the event dual access exists, access in Workday will be revoked immediately. The agency will be
responsible for determining what access is appropriate.
Anticipated Completion Date:  August 16, 2019 – Created the Dual Access report in SARS System
Security Access database. September 5, 2019 – SARS System Security sends daily confirmation of dual
access status.
2019-005 Department of Administrative Services
Strengthen Controls over Security Access in Workday
Significant Deficiency
Effective controls over security access to information systems are designed to separate duties
between the security administration function and the user functions. Additionally, if conflicting
access cannot be avoided, activities of those employees with conflicting access should be monitored
to ensure only authorized changes are made.
Workday has system controls that ensure an employee with update access cannot make changes to
their own pay. However, we found that some employees with certain security access in Workday
could make changes to their own access profiles that would enable them to make changes to others’
pay, as well as changes to other personnel information. We noted two such employees who made
changes to their own access profiles. One employee made one change that restricted their access,
while the other employee made multiple access permission changes to their own access. The
department had not implemented controls to review the appropriateness of employees’ access in
Workday, nor controls to monitor activity by employees with security access to determine whether
any unauthorized changes were made.
We recommend department management develop and implement procedures to review access
permissions granted for employees with Workday access to ensure access is appropriate for their
job duties. In addition, if the ability to change their own access cannot be disabled for employees
with security access to Workday, we recommend that department management implement a
process to monitor activities of these employees, and specifically, determine if the two identified
users made any unauthorized changes.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-13-
In an effort to strengthen security controls over access in Workday, we created an agency level
agreement outlining expected behaviors relating to security access in Workday.
We are unable to prevent users from changing their own roles in Workday. To compensate for this, a
report has been created to identify self-assigned roles and is monitored daily.
Anticipated Completion Date:  September 18, 2019 – Implementation and agency training for process
changes. October 1, 2019 – Agencies are required to follow new process.
2019-006 Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Improve Year-End Closing Processes
Significant Deficiency
As part of the state’s financial reporting process, state agencies are responsible for making year-end
entries in the accounting system to facilitate financial reporting in accordance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). During our audit, we identified the following issues:
 Entries for year-end accruals for distributions to universities accounts were only partially
completed resulting in misstatements totaling $66.4 million. In addition, the department
misclassified $27 million due from universities as interest receivable instead of due from
component units. We communicated similar issues to the department in prior audits. These
errors were corrected by the Department of Administrative Services for the state’s financial
statements.
 The accrual process for distributions to community colleges expenditure incorrectly
included approximately $723,000 of expenditures already recorded in the
accounting system.
 The methodology to accrue expenditures for the Oregon opportunity grant and the Oregon
promise grant for 2019 was changed in fiscal year 2019, resulting in an overstatement of
expenditures of $1.4 million. Accounting staff did not ensure changes to the accrual
methodology aligned with the grant program’s reconciliations which identify amounts owed
and due from colleges and universities.
 The entries to record receivables and payables between the department and universities
relating to financing construction projects did not properly adjust for accreted interest with
one university, resulting in an overstatement and understatement of approximately $1.4
million. We communicated a similar issue in prior years.
Changes in accounting staff, which resulted in the loss of some knowledge related to the year-end
accrual processes, combined with a lack of sufficient documentation to support the year-end
processes contributed to these errors.
We recommend department management develop and implement procedures to prevent, detect,
and correct errors in the year-end accrual processes.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
The Higher Education Coordinating Commission generally agrees with the review’s findings and
concurs with the audit conclusions.
 HECC has hired a new lead accountant with significant SARS and SFMA knowledge and
experience. Since her hire, HECC has begun to perform monthly reviews of all transactions so
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-14-
that we may detect and correct errors as they occur. This biennium, all prior months have been
reviewed prior to accounting month close and issues that have been detected have been
researched, corrected, and documented.
 The Lead Accountant has also created a desk manual that is substantially complete and is guiding
the work of all HECC accountants. HECC will continue to update the manual as new policies and
procedures are approved and implemented.
Anticipated Completion Date:  As of January 30, 2020, all actions have been completed.
2019-007 Oregon Department of Transportation
Strengthen Review of Motor Fuels Tax Entry
Significant Deficiency
State accounting policies require management to design transaction processing controls to ensure
that transaction dollar amounts are properly calculated, accurately recorded, and properly
classified in the accounting records. The department’s process to record revenue transactions
includes a review by management of the documentation prepared for entering the transactions into
the accounting records.
We recalculated the motor fuels tax revenue for fiscal year 2019 and determined the department
collected more revenue than what was recorded in the accounting records as tax revenue. Upon
further review, we found the monthly tax revenue for January 2019 was entered into the
accounting system using an incorrect revenue source code and consequently was recorded in a
different account. As a result, the motor fuels tax account was understated by $42.9 million.
Management reviewed the input document before entry into the accounting records which would
not detect the input error. The department did not have additional procedures to detect the error
after entry. When we brought the error to management’s attention, an adjustment was made to
correct it.
We recommend department management strengthen review procedures to help ensure
transactions are accurately recorded and classified in the accounting records.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with the finding and recommendation
The Revenue and Expenditure Manager has created a report that looks at the three major revenue
streams, DMV, Fuels Tax, & Motor Carrier, to capture any anomalies in data. This report will be
reviewed monthly to catch any key entry errors. There will also be a review of reports generated from
the Fuels Tax System compared to data in TEAMS to look for any discrepancies.
Anticipated Completion Date:  Completed January 12, 2020
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-15-
Section III – Federal Awards Findings and Questioned Costs
Management Responses were not subjected to auditing procedures.
2019-008 Department of Human Services
Improve Accuracy of Performance Data Reports
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2018G996115; 2018, 2019G996115; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2018-008, 2015-025, 2014-026, 2013-032, 2010-015
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 265.3(a); 45 CFR 265.7(f)
Federal regulations require the department to collect monthly, and report quarterly in the ACF-199
TANF data report certain non-financial data elements for services paid with TANF federal funding.
Federal regulations also require the department to report data quarterly in the ACF-209 SSP-MOE
data report, for TANF eligible clients whose benefits are paid with designated state funds called
separate state program maintenance of effort. Both data reports should be supported by applicable
performance records.
Prior to selecting sample items for testing the ACF-199 data reports, we reviewed fiscal year 2019
client expenditure data as it related to the data reports. The dataset provided for client expenditures
included some coding elements from the department’s case management system, but not all
elements necessary to determine the funding source for individual client payments. As the reports
are intended to provide information on client services based on their funding, we were unable to
confirm if all cases paid with TANF federal funds were included appropriately in the ACF-199
reports. We found, on average, that up to 2,200 cases each month may have been improperly
excluded from the ACF-199 reports. We also found, on average, that 180 cases each month reported
in the ACF-199 reports may have been improperly included because they did not have
corresponding federal TANF expenditures.
For data submitted in the fiscal year 2019 ACF-199 reports, we reviewed report line items identified
as “key” by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. We reviewed a random sample of 50
cases and identified the following known errors:
 Six cases where clients were incorrectly counted as exempt from the federal time limit;
 One case where the client’s classification as parent with minor child in the family was
incorrect;
 One case where the work eligible indicator was incorrect;
 Three cases where work participation status was inaccurate; and
 Two cases where activities other than work participation were inaccurately reported.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-16-
We also reviewed a random sample of 25 cases for data submitted in the ACF-209 quarterly reports
and identified the following:
 One case where the type of family for work participation was inaccurate;
 Five cases where receipt of subsidized child care was incorrect;
 Two cases where relationship to head of household was incorrect;
 Two cases where the work eligible indicator was incorrect; and
 One case where work participation status was inaccurate.
In performing other testing procedures where a sample of 38 cases was selected from the ACF-199
reports, we found one case that should not have been included in the report as it did not receive
TANF payments during the report period.
According to the department, these errors were due to worker errors when entering information in
the case management system. The department reviews the report data for formatting, but not
accuracy. As the department is planning to implement a new eligibility system, they have suspended
effort to address the data reporting errors in the current system.
This finding has been ongoing since fiscal year 2010.
We recommend department management provide additional coding elements related to
expenditure data to allow for identification of federal expenditures within the dataset, and
implement processes and procedures to ensure data reports accurately reflect case status and
activity of the reporting period.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action: The Department will submit a business change request to the Integrated Eligibility
project requesting additional coding elements be added to the dataset out of the current eligibility
system, Legacy. The Department has been in communication with the state’s federal contact to discuss
the accuracy of the federal report and the changes to Oregon’s eligibility system. The department will
continue technical assistance with the appropriate contacts at Federal Administration for Children and
Families. This process will ensure the Department has a clear understanding of the instructions for
each federal field. Change requests will be submitted to the Integrated Eligibility project to correct
business requirements as necessary.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2020
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-17-
2019-009 Department of Human Services
Improve Compliance with Work Verification Plan Requirements
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2018G996115; 2018, 2019G996115; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 261.61; 45 CFR 261.62
Federal regulations require each state to maintain adequate documentation, verification, and
internal control procedures to ensure the accuracy of data used in calculating work participation
rates. Each state must have procedures to count and verify reported hours of work and must comply
with its Work Verification Plan as approved by the Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS). Oregon’s Work Verification Plan states employment attendance will be documented and
verified in one of four ways: pay stubs, time cards, sign-in sheets or other specific attendance
records, or by documenting a phone conversation with the employer. If a client has stable
employment, the department may use a six-month projection of actual hours. However, if the
department receives information that actual hours have changed, the department is required to re-
verify the current average and update the projection as needed.
We randomly selected 40 participating clients and reviewed case file documentation for verification
of work activity participation for one month during the fiscal year. We found 16 cases where the
department did not adhere to the approved Work Verification Plan policies and procedures for
maintaining documentation of hours of participation, appropriately projecting hours of
participation, and accurately reporting hours of participation in their automated data processing
system.
These inaccurate or unverified hours were used in calculating the work participation rate reported
to DHHS. If the state fails to follow the approved Work Verification Plan, DHHS may penalize the
state.
We recommend department management strengthen controls to ensure adherence to the
department’s work verification plan documentation of participation and projection of hours of
participation, and to ensure data entered into the automated data processing system is accurate and
complete.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action: The Department’s TANF policy team, in partnership with the training unit, will
create training materials for field staff specifically addressing attendance documentation requirements
and projection of work hours. The policy team will then conduct technical assistance with contactors
who capture and maintain attendance records, as well as targeted communication to field staff specific
to attendance documentation and retention. Quality Assurance (QA), in partnership with TANF policy,
will conduct targeted reviews over the course of a few months following technical assistance and
communication. QA and policy will work with a research analyst to ensure a statistical sample is pulled
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-18-
and reviewed. Targeted reviews will identify areas where additional technical assistance and
communication is necessary.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2020
2019-010 Department of Human Services
Ensure Appropriate Information is Used for Determining Benefit Amounts
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2018G996115; 2018, 2019G996115; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $412 (known); $577,056 (likely)
Criteria: 45 CFR 263.11(a)(1); 45 CFR 261.14
Federal regulations allow the use of federal TANF funds for expenditures that are reasonably
calculated to accomplish the purposes of the program. In Oregon, the calculation of TANF benefits is
based on multiple factors, one of which is the number of qualifying household members. Benefit
amounts may also be pro-rated based upon when activities impacting the amount occur within the
benefit month.
We reviewed a sample of 50 client payments to verify the benefit amount was determined
appropriately and identified the following errors:
 One case where duplicate benefits were issued due to caseworker error when entering the
date the case was re-opened; and
 One case where the amount of benefits issued included an ineligible family member, as the
caseworker did not update the household size when one member turned 18 years old.
These two errors resulted in an overpayment of federal funds of $128, with likely questioned costs
of $577,056 when projected to the population.
Additionally, while performing other testing procedures related to benefit reductions due to
noncooperation, we identified two cases where benefits were restored or supplemented with
incorrect amounts after the benefit reduction. Restoring or supplementing benefits is allowable if a
client begins cooperating, however, the benefits were reissued at incorrect amounts as the
caseworker issued the benefits for the entire month rather than the time remaining after clients
began cooperating. For these two clients, we identified known federal overpayments of $284.
We recommend department management strengthen controls to ensure clients benefit payments
are appropriately determined.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-19-
Corrective Action: The Department’s TANF policy team will create protocols for both JOBS
Disqualifications (DQ) and Child Support sanctions (CS) to provide clear guidance to field staff
regarding the effective date of benefit restoration once requirements have been met. The training unit,
in partnership with TANF policy, will create a quick reference guide (QRG) based on the protocols
which will be made available on the training unit website. Policy and training unit will provide
communication and training to field staff regarding protocols and QRG.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2020
2019-011 Department of Human Services
Maintain Documentation to Support Client Eligibility
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2018G996115; 2018, 2019G996115; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Eligibility
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 42 USC 608(a)(3); 42 USC 602(a)(1)(A); 42 USC 602(a)(1)(B)(iii)
To comply with federal regulations for eligibility determination, the department’s Family Services
Manual requires each TANF client to complete and sign an application at the initial application and
at eligibility re-determination. Completing the application form is key in determining a client’s TANF
eligibility. By signing the application, the client assigns rights to support received to the department,
as required for eligibility by federal regulations, and agrees to actively pursue any asset for which
they have a legal right or claim. The client also accepts responsibility for participating in
employment activities for program eligibility.
Of 50 clients randomly selected for testing, the department was unable to readily provide
documentation as follows:
 Two client files were missing signed applications;
 Three client files were missing evidence of pursuit of child support assets; and
 Four client files were missing evidence of employability screenings.
Although we were able to verify other eligibility criteria were met through review of clients’ case
files, we were not able to verify all eligibility documentation. By not maintaining adequate
documentation, the department may not be able to demonstrate compliance with all eligibility
requirements.
We recommend department management coordinate resources to better maintain and more
readily provide sufficient eligibility documentation.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action: The TANF policy team, in partnership with the training unit, will provide
communication and training to field staff regarding the eligibility requirements for the employability
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-20-
screening (415A) and child support cooperation (428A) forms. The policy team will provide targeted
communication to the Business Operations Specialists team who are responsible for managing the local
processes to ensure documents are properly scanned into the Electronic Document Management
System (EDMS). Quality Assurance (QA), in partnership with policy, will conduct targeted reviews
monthly to ensure the 415A and 428A are completed at eligibility determination and document
scanning processes are being adhered to. QA and policy will work with a research analyst to ensure a
statistical sample is pulled and reviewed. Targeted reviews will identify areas where additional
technical assistance and communication is necessary.
Oregon will be piloting a new eligibility system, ONE, beginning May 2020 with full rollout scheduled
by end of calendar year 2020. It is anticipated ONE will resolve some of the errors based on system
functionality.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2020
2019-012 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Controls over Cost Allocation Process
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Adoption Assistance – Title IV-E (93.659)
Immunization Cooperative Agreements (93.268)
Opioid STR (93.788)
Federal Award Numbers and Year:  Various
Compliance Requirement:  Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  2018-021
Questioned Costs:  TANF $1,824,260 (known), Medicaid $36,234 (known)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.62; 2 CFR 200.400; 45 CFR 95.509(a)(b)
Federal regulations require state agencies to submit Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plans (plans)
to the federal oversight agency for approval. Changes to federally approved plans are allowed but
require state agencies to notify the federal oversight agency when changes affect the allocation of
costs. At a minimum, state agencies are required to submit an annual statement certifying that the
plan is not outdated.
The Department of Human Services (department) administers separate plans for the department
and Oregon Health Authority (authority). The plans outline the methods used to allocate various
cost pools to federal programs. The department submits biennial plans to the federal oversight
agency for approval with interim updates submitted prior to the start of the second year of each
biennium.
During our testing we noted the following instances where the department did not allocate costs
according to the approved plans:
 One allocation method used during the AY19 biennium was not approved by the federal
oversight agency. The method was initially included in the AY19 plan submission; however,
during the approval process the federal oversight agency determined the method was
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-21-
inappropriate. This method was subsequently excluded from the final approved AY19 plan
but continued to be used in the department’s cost allocation process. The continued use of
this method resulted in the under claiming of federal funds across the department’s various
programs.
 Statistics for a metrics based allocation method were incorrectly calculated for the AY19
biennium until identified in April 2019 as part of our audit procedures. This resulted in a
small over or under claiming of various federal and state programs.
 The wrong penetration rates were used in the formulas for three activity codes when
calculating the random moment sampling statistics. This resulted in the over-claiming of
Medicaid by $36,234 over a 23-month period and TANF by $1,824,260 over a 15-month
period. SNAP and other federal and state programs were under-claimed by $1,425,334 over
a 15-month period.
 Formulas for ten activity codes used in the calculation of the random moment sampling
statistics did not agree to the approved plan. However, no impact to federal funds is noted as
the formulas used in the cost allocation process appeared appropriate.
We recommend department and authority management ensure the cost allocations are processed
according to the federally approved cost allocation plans.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action Plan: The Medicaid impact of $36,234 was corrected with document numbers
BTCC2130 through BTCC2136 with an effective date of July 14, 2019.  The refund was reported to CMS
on the CMS-64 FFY19 Q4. The TANF impact of $1,824,260 was corrected with document numbers
BTCC3054 through BTCC3137 with an effective date of September 8, 2019. The refund was reported to
ACF on the ACF-196R Part 1 report, line 22B FFY19 Q4.
Internal controls have been strengthened and the Public Assistance Cost Allocation Plan Change Log for
both DHS and OHA are reviewed on a monthly basis notating any change, the reason for the change,
and the plan part and section reference. The changes accumulated over the year are reviewed prior to
the annual state fiscal year submission to the Federal Department of Health and Human Services Cost
Allocation Services unit to ensure alignment between the Cost Allocation System and the federally
approved plans.
Anticipated Completion Date: September 8, 2019
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-22-
2019-013 Oregon Health Authority
Improve Controls for Monitoring MMIS Claims Edits and Audits
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 1805OR5MAP and 1805OR5ADM; 2018,
1905OR5MAP and 1905OR5ADM; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Special Tests and
Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding: 2018-013
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 42 CFR 447.45
In the prior year, we reported that the Oregon Health Authority (authority) did not adequately
monitor aspects of the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) claims edits and audits;
see Audit Report 2019-14, finding 2018-013. The authority used MMIS to process almost $7.9 billion
in paid claims during fiscal year 2019, and relies on the system’s numerous claims edits and audits
function to provide assurance that payments are appropriate and to prevent and detect potential
inappropriate payments.
For fiscal year 2019, we determined the authority had taken some corrective action such as
compiling a comprehensive inventory of MMIS claims edits and establishing agreement with the
system contractor to begin testing the top 20 percent of the edits to verify they are active and
functioning correctly. However, as of June 30, 2019, we noted the following:
 Management had not appropriately limited the number of employees that had the ability to
modify the claims edits and audits and did not have a process to monitor for unauthorized
changes;
 The contractor had tested only 11 of the 116 edits identified for testing; and
 Management had not completed a testing plan or actual testing of the remaining 80 percent
of the claims edits and audits.
Having a strategic framework and thorough understanding of these controls, including what they do
and when they trigger, is critical for ensuring accurate and properly recorded payments. If the
claims edits and audits are not configured and functioning correctly, there is the potential for
millions of dollars of inappropriate payments.
We recommend authority management implement procedures to monitor user access and
potential unauthorized changes to the application, as well as continue to implement processes to
verify the effectiveness and completeness of the claims edits and audits function.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action: At the initial review of which employees had the ability to modify claims edits and
audits, it was difficult to determine how many and who exactly had the access to do such work. We
were looking at the incorrect role and it appeared that more employees had that access than it was
originally thought to be the case.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-23-
Additionally, a process was not in place to capture upstream whether unauthorized changes are being
made in the adding of edits and audits into MMIS. There is a healthy downstream process through
testing and validation that captures any anomaly with regard to edits and audits after they are entered
into MMIS. The addition of new claims edits and audits goes through a robust process for testing and
validation, but that process does not mitigate against someone, either intentionally or accidentally
making a change in MMIS outside of that robust testing process.
It is true that the contractor had only tested 11 of the 116 edits and audits in MMIS as of June 30, 2019.
The approved testing plan and contract did not go into effect until April 1, 2019, so it is not surprising
that only 11 edits and audits had been tested. Deliverables received since then will show a greater
number have been tested, but it is true that only 11 had been tested as of June 30, 2019.
It is also true that an HSD monitoring of the remaining 80% of the edits and audits plan had not been
delivered as of June 30, 2019. The HSD plan was implemented on October 1, 2019.
A further review of the roles was conducted following the audit visit and it was determined that we
were looking at an incorrect role. The role unique to that type of work in MMIS is, in fact, in place with
only four employees able to modify claims edits and audits in MMIS. That has since been verified and
confirmed that only four OHA employees can indeed modify claims edits and audits.
The testing of claims edits and audits continues both with the MMIS contractor and with the MMIS
Business Support Unit and a quarterly deliverable is produced and sent to the Secretary of State
Auditors office, along with a copy provided to HSD leadership for addition to the Team Central site.
We are exploring a way to have a “checks and balances” approach to the claims edits and audits
modification process that would require any proposed new edit or audit be monitored by allowing only
one person to set up the edit or audit and the another person be able to activate the edit and audit. We
are working on a way to have a process that would capture upstream impact. No plan has yet been
created, but we have worked on some scenarios to put a plan into place.
The claims edits and audits testing plans have been implemented as of April 1, 2019 and October 1,
2019 and are currently active with quarterly deliverables required both for the MMIS contractor and
the MMIS Business Support Unit.
Role review is underway for the modification rights and it is believed that a new role can be tested by
April 30, 2020.
Anticipated Completion Date: April 30, 2020
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-24-
2019-014 Oregon Health Authority
Ensure MMIS Data Tables are Accurate and Updated Timely
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number: Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Federal Award Numbers and Year: 1805OR5MAP and 1805OR5ADM; 2018,
1905OR5MAP and 1905OR5ADM; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable Costs/Cost
Principles
Type of Finding: Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: Unknown
Criteria: 42 CFR 433.32; 42 CFR 447.45(f)(1)(iv)
The Oregon Health Authority (authority) administers client based payments for the Medicaid
program. For some clients, Medicaid allows the authority to make payments to providers for a
specific fee-for-service (FFS). During fiscal year 2019, FFS payments totaled approximately $1.67
billion.
The FFS payments are calculated based upon factors such as the type of procedure, location of the
facility, and other factors determined by the federal Centers for Medicaid Services (CMS). The
authority uses the Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) to make the calculation and
process the payments. CMS generally updates their factors each year, and the authority similarly
updates the tables in MMIS used to make the calculations.
During our testing, we identified that data in one of the tables did not agree to the rates established
by CMS. As a result, the authority paid incorrect amounts to providers for three sample items that
were FFS transactions.
In addition, staff informed us of other data elements in MMIS related to FFS that were incorrect.
According to management, CMS provided updated data elements on November 21, 2018, that were
uploaded into MMIS. CMS subsequently issued corrected and updated tables on December 28, 2018,
that were not identified by authority staff or uploaded into MMIS.
As of March 2, 2020, management is not able to provide an estimate of the magnitude of the issue.
Due to the systemic nature of the issue, we are unable to reasonably estimate or quantify potential
questioned costs. According to management, they are in the process of performing procedures to
identify the total effect and implementing a batch-entry solution to correct the data in MMIS.
We recommend authority management continue their analysis and correct all incorrect provider
payments. We also recommend authority management ensure tables are updated timely and
accurately when CMS provides updates.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action: It was discovered that an incorrect table put into MMIS that adjudicates claims and
that table contained rates that did not agree with those established by CMS. This oversight, it was
discovered, was due to HSD not being aware of a new table and rates that had been sent in one of CMS’
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-25-
regularly sent transmittals. This led to the incorrect table being in MMIS through 2019 and not
allowing for the processing of certain claims containing a specific code at the appropriate rate.
Once the error was discovered by an analyst in the Medicaid Policy Unit, immediate action was taken to
calculate the extent of the incorrect payment on those claims. The claims data was gathered and an
assessment of the total amount of the inaccurate amounts is being calculated. Furthermore, the correct
table was put into MMIS so that as of today, those claims are paying appropriately and at the correct
rate. Furthermore, an effort is underway to reprocess the claims from 2019 to determine the amount of
underpayment.
Additionally, we are determining the course of action that should happen to see what can be done in
the future to mitigate against the incorrect rates being loaded into MMIS tables for claims processing.
While a final plan awaits development and HSD leadership approval, one possibility is to be sure more
individuals are receiving CMS transmittals where guidance is given, including changes to rates for
certain claims coding.
A conversation was held with the Medicaid Policy Unit and it was agreed that it would be beneficial for
the MMIS Business Support Unit to have someone who can receive the CMS Transmittals so that others
can see when a change in guidance has occurred. There will be two analysts in the MMIS BSU who will
be added to the transmittal email list.
The claims data is first being run through the MMIS User Acceptance Testing site to reprocess the
claims to determine the amount still owed these providers. An analyst from the Medicaid Policy Unit
and two analysts from the MMIS Business Support Unit have set up 6 System Mass Adjusted Process
(SMAP’s) segments and three of have been completed so far. Once the six SMAP’s are completed the
accurate amounts will be known and a determination made to reprocess those claims to make the
provider whole.
Anticipated Completion Date: May 29, 2020
2019-015 Oregon Health Authority
Improve Documentation for Provider Eligibility
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number: Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Federal Award Numbers and Year: 1805OR5MAP and 1805OR5ADM; 2018
1905OR5MAP and 1905OR5ADM; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: 2018-016; 2017-015; 2016-025, 2015-020, 2014-023,
2014-019, 2013-041, 2012-030
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria:  42 CFR 455.436; Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR 411-031-0040)
Provider eligibility requirements for the Medicaid program differ depending upon the type of
services provided; however, all providers are subject to specified database checks and are required
to sign an adherence to federal regulations agreement (agreement). Additionally federal regulations
require that the Oregon Health Authority (authority) determine eligibility for Medicaid providers
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-26-
and periodically revalidate providers by performing database checks to ensure providers are still
eligible to participate in the Medicaid program.
We tested 30 authority providers receiving Medicaid funds during fiscal year 2019 and found the
authority could improve the documentation supporting provider eligibility. Specifically, we found:
 For one provider, the authority was unable to locate the Provider Enrollment Agreement
(PEA). We notified the authority of this issue and the authority was able to obtain a new
completed PEA.
 For a different provider, the authority did not complete the required revalidation database
checks within the required timeframe. After we identified the specific item, the authority
completed the necessary database checks.
The above issues occurred due to incomplete record maintenance and staff error. Failure to perform
the necessary background checks and retain provider enrollment agreements increases the risk of
payments to inappropriate vendors.
We recommend authority management strengthen controls to ensure documentation supporting a
provider’s eligibility determination is retained.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action Plan: During the 2019 Revalidation cycle the state began requiring updated Provider
Enrollment Agreements (PEAs) for all revalidating organizations. Revalidation is required every 5
years for Medicaid providers. By the end of 2020, the state will require PEAs from all newly enrolling
and revalidating organization and individual providers. By the end of 2020, full implementation,
enrollment applications and revalidations without attached PEA’s will no longer be accepted. These
requirements will ensure all providers have a current PEA.
Provider validations may be missed due to manual processes. In 2019, the state began pulling missed
validation reports on a quarterly basis and completing a new set of validations for providers missing
any validations. Beginning in February 2020, the state implemented to process to pull the missed
validation reports no less frequently than monthly to ensure missed validations are corrected at the
earliest opportunity. The state is currently exploring automated processes to ensure provider
validations are completed at the time of enrollment, revalidation and reactivation. The state continues
to check all providers against OIG, SAM and Death Master databases monthly as required.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2020
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-27-
2019-016 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve Documentation and Controls for Client Eligibility Determinations
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number: Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Federal Award Numbers and Year: 1805OR5MAP and 1805OR5ADM; 2018,
1905OR5MAP and 1905OR5ADM; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable Costs/Cost
Principles; Eligibility
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2018-015, 2018-014, 2017-014, 2016-024, 2015-016,
2014-018, 2013-038, 2012-033, 2011-015, 2010-012
Questioned Costs: $48,472 (known)
Criteria:  42 CFR 435.916(a); 42 CFR 435.916(b); 42 CFR 435.916(d); 42 CFR 447.56(e)(1); 42 CFR
433.138; 42 CFR 433.32
Federal regulations require certain conditions be met for the Department of Human Services
(department) and Oregon Health Authority (authority) to receive Medicaid funding for medical
claims. The requirements include obtaining signed applications, redetermining client eligibility for
the program every 12 months or when the agency receives information regarding a change in the
client’s circumstances that may affect their eligibility, properly enrolling eligible clients in the
Medicare program, and providing assurance that payments are calculated correctly. In addition, the
department and the authority are required to maintain sufficient documentation supporting the
client’s eligibility and individual claims.
We randomly selected 100 clients and one Medicaid service payment associated with each client. We
reviewed agency documentation to verify matching, eligibility, and allowability of Medicaid service.
For 12 clients, we found the issues described below.
 Three clients where income was not appropriately verified against the Federal hub. The
errors related to a prior year finding and occurred prior to the authority taking corrective
action.
 Five clients did not have their eligibility verified within 12 months in accordance with
federal requirements.
 Two clients were not appropriately enrolled in the Medicare program, resulting in
questioned costs of $47,503.
 One client did not have a signed application on file.
 For one client, the required client co-payment was not applied prior to making payment to a
nursing facility for one month, resulting in questioned costs of $627.
 One client received homecare services from December 2018 to July 2019. In July 2019, a
Final Order, a legal ruling, was issued to retroactively disallow a portion of the hours paid
during that time totaling $342. The department has yet to recover the funds from the
provider.
The above issues occurred due to input errors, oversight errors, and other administrative errors by
various caseworkers.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-28-
We recommend department and authority management strengthen controls to perform timely
eligibility redeterminations and verification of client income and ensure eligible clients are
appropriately enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid. Additionally, we recommend management
provide periodic training to caseworkers to reduce the risk of administrative errors. We also
recommend management correct all identified issues and reimburse the federal agency for
unallowable costs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective Action Plan: The department is committed to providing timely benefits to only those
individuals who are appropriately determined eligible.
One of the five individuals identified who did not have their eligibility verified within 12 months was
receiving MAGI Medicaid benefits. The MAGI redetermination was initiated timely, but the information
returned to the agency, by the individual, was not processed timely. Since the time of this individual’s
redetermination, the department has taken the following steps:
 Implemented a more thorough process for workload management with increased reporting
and data analysis to better resource ongoing work
 Hired staff to monitor workload
 Expanded capacity and locations of the SSP/OHP Processing Center, hiring additional eligibility
staff in the process
 Continuously analyzing resource allocation, making adjustments when needed.
For the remaining findings, the department expects that with the implementation of the new
Integrated Eligibility (IE) System statewide during 2020, there will be greater operational
opportunities to strengthen our client eligibility controls, specifically related to the timeliness and
accuracy of eligibility initial determinations and redeterminations along with improved electronic
retention of required data elements such as signed applications. Additionally, the IE system
implementation includes cross policy, system and advanced policy training to support staff, eligibility
workers and case managers statewide. We believe this training will also assist in ensuring we are
building and developing an informed workforce with consistent knowledge of federal and state
eligibility policies.
The department will correct all identified issues and recoup the funds by February 2021, from the
provider who was overpaid and will reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Anticipated Completion Date: February 28, 2021
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-29-
2019-017 Department of Human Services
Complete System Modifications to Ensure Proper Reporting of Program Expenditures
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number: Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658), Non-Major Program
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Federal Award Numbers and Year: 1801ORFOST, 2018; 1901ORFOST, 2019;
1805OR5MAP, 2018; 1805OR5ADM, 2018;
1905OR5MAP, 2019; 1905OR5ADM, 2019
Compliance Requirement: Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2018-018, 2017-013, 2016-018, 2015-007, 2013-023,
2012-024
Questioned Costs: Foster Care $50,811 (known), Medicaid $10,577 (known)
Criteria: 45 CFR 1356.21
The department uses its child welfare information system, OR-Kids, to manage placements,
eligibility, payments, and other case information. Information systems should be designed to ensure
information processed by the system is complete, accurate, and valid. As with any significant
program or system, management should have an adequate understanding of the processes and
controls it is relying on, and should obtain assurance those processes and controls are functioning as
intended.
While performing current year follow-up procedures related to prior year findings that identified
processing issues within OR-Kids, we found errors continue to occur when various types of
corrections are made to placement information in the system. When placement corrections are
initiated, OR-Kids issues a “new” payment, and simultaneously recovers the funds from the payment
issued at the time of original services, which generally results in no payment to the provider.
However, this process does not always occur as it should, and results in the department incorrectly
reporting and drawing federal funds. For some placement corrections, OR-Kids processed the
recovery of the funds in a state grant instead of the federal program, resulting in estimated
inappropriate federal expenditures in fiscal year 2019 of $50,811 for Title IV-E Foster Care, and
$10,577 for Medicaid.
This issue was originally identified in fiscal year 2015. During fiscal year 2019 the department
developed a partial fix to the OR-Kids system to prevent these processing errors from occurring. The
agency has also repaid estimated questioned costs identified in the prior year audits; however, the
actual questioned costs to be repaid have not been identified. Reports that can be used to identify
actual amounts to be repaid are in development.
We recommend department management review OR-Kids transaction processing and complete
system modifications as appropriate to ensure proper financial reporting of program expenditures.
We also recommend department management review prior year and current year transactions and
reimburse the federal agency for grant expenditures claimed inappropriately.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with the recommendation.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-30-
A report has been developed to identify adjustments that impacted a state grant rather than the
federal grant and remains in the validation stage. Once the report is completed and accurate, the
agency will use it to report accurately and will begin to make appropriate adjustments to all incorrect
claims. Known costs in this finding will be reimbursed on the 6/30/2020 CB-496.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2020
2019-018 Department of Human Services
Strengthen Controls to Ensure the Accuracy and Completeness of “Applicable Child” Data
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Program Title and CFDA Number: Adoption Assistance – Title IV-E (93.659)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 1901ORADPT, 2019; 1801ORADPT, 2018
Compliance Requirement: Level of Effort
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: 2016-030, 2015-014, 2014-017
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 42 USC 673(a)(8)(A)
Since fiscal year 2010, states are required to have two sets of program eligibility criteria for Title IV-
E Adoption Assistance. One set of criteria applies to a child who is considered an “applicable child”
due to the child’s age, length of time in care, or because they are a sibling of an applicable child. The
second set of criteria is for a child who is considered “not an applicable child” and must meet the
eligibility requirements in place before 2010. In addition, states are required to estimate any savings
in state expenditures as a result of applying the additional applicable child eligibility rules and spend
an amount equal to the savings to provide other program related services.
The Department of Human Services (department) relies on reports from the child welfare system,
OR-Kids, to calculate cost savings related to children determined eligible under the applicable child
criteria. During fiscal year 2019 we noted the following issues related to the department’s
identification and tracking of applicable children:
 In response to a prior year audit finding, in February 2019 the department updated the OR-
Kids eligibility screen to provide additional detail for each child’s eligibility determination.
However, the department identified in February 2020 this update caused eligibility
determinations to change to pending status when children were moved from the pre-
adoptive to adoptive case file, and resulted in any new applicable children not being counted
on the report used to calculate cost savings. The update also resulted in all Adoption
Assistance subsidy payments related to eligibility determinations made after the update to
be paid from state funds rather than split between federal and state.
 Our testing of 60 samples for eligibility identified three instances where a caseworker
determined the child met the “not an applicable child” eligibility criteria; however, eligibility
in OR-Kids was manually entered incorrectly as “applicable child.” Payments related to these
cases were then included in the savings calculation.
The OR-Kids system and manual errors resulted in the inaccurate identification of applicable child
case data. Without complete and accurate data, the department is not able to correctly calculate the
related savings of state expenditures.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-31-
We recommend department management continue to correct known applicable child eligibility
data issues in OR-Kids to ensure data used to estimate the savings in state expenditures is complete
and accurate.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with the recommendation.
Federal Policy and Resources identified the issues related to the first finding due to a question from
OFS. The Department has already updated procedure/process to ensure testing and monitoring occurs
when changes to OR-Kids are implemented into production until assured the system and reports are
working appropriately. OR-Kids Business analysts and Office of Information Services will analyze and
fix the bugs identified from the implementation of this change. Once all fixes are completed Federal
Policy and Resources will work with Office of Financial Services to ensure all adoptions assistance title
IV-E eligibility is being reported accurately.
The second finding where the three cases were incorrect, will be corrected and removed from the
applicable child savings calculation. Federal Policy and Resource will submit a change request to
require OR-Kids to improve the batch process for the final adoption assistance case. In the interim
the Department will create an exception.
Anticipated Completion Date: September 30, 2020 for all actions
2019-019 Oregon Health Authority
Comply with Subrecipient Monitoring Requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Program Title and CFDA Number: Opioid STR (CFDA 93.788)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: TI080258; 2018 & 2019, H79TI080258; 2019,
H79TI081716; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance 
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 75.352(b); 45 CFR 75.352(d)
Federal regulations require that pass-through entities evaluate each subrecipient’s risk of
noncompliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward for
the purpose of determining appropriate subrecipient monitoring activities. Monitoring activities
should be completed based on the results of the subrecipient’s determined risk.
The authority does not have a formal process for performing risk assessments to determine
appropriate monitoring activities. Moreover, the authority has not developed a formal process to
ensure subrecipients comply with federal regulations, terms and conditions of the subaward, and
that subaward performance goals are achieved. Although program staff maintain a close working
relationship with subrecipients, these interactions are not formalized and documented for the
purpose of subrecipient monitoring. Authority management stated they were unaware of the federal
requirement to have formal standardized documentation of subrecipient monitoring.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-32-
If subrecipient monitoring is not performed and documented, subawards could be used for
unauthorized purposes and performance goals not met.
We recommend authority management comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements,
develop and implement internal controls to ensure risk assessments are performed and
documented for each subrecipient, and monitoring activities are completed and documented in
conformance with risk assessment results.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Health Systems Division will implement the use of a risk assessment tool for each subrecipient of
federal grant funds for all future SAMHSA grants administered by HSD. HSD will also develop a tool to
document post award monitoring for subrecipients based on their respective risk assessments.
Anticipated Completion Date:
Develop risk assessment tool June 30, 2020
Develop subrecipient monitoring tool June 30, 2020
Implementation of tools September 30, 2020
2019-020 Oregon Health Authority
Improve Controls over Federal Performance Reporting
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Program Title and CFDA Number: Opioid STR (CFDA 93.788)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: TI080258; 2018 & 2019, H79TI080258; 2019,
H79TI081716; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 75.342(b); Opioid STR Notice of Awards
The Opioid STR grant requires performance progress reports to be submitted semi-annually and
include an overview of the goals and objectives accomplished during the funding period as stated in
the authority’s original grant application. In addition, federal regulations require award grantees to
establish and maintain effective internal control that provides reasonable assurance the award is
managed in compliance with regulations and terms and conditions of the award. Effective controls
may include review and approval of reports for completeness and accuracy.
The authority has consistently submitted performance progress reports; however, it has not
implemented internal controls to ensure that performance reports are complete and accurate prior
to submission to the federal awarding agency. Authority management stated they were unaware of
this federal requirement. This absence of controls could result in a misrepresentation of the grant’s
performance.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-33-
We recommend authority management develop and implement controls to ensure performance
progress reports are complete and accurate prior to report submission.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Health Systems Division (HSD) will develop a tool to track internal control processes to ensure
progress reports are complete and accurate prior to submission for future SAMHSA grants. This tool
will include each step for the internal control and will identify the responsible entity.
Anticipated Completion Date:
Develop control process tool June 30, 2020
Implementation of process tool September 30, 2020
2019-021 Oregon Military Department
Strengthen Controls to Ensure Financial Reports are Accurate and Adequately Supported by
Accounting Records
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Defense
Program Title and CFDA Number: National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance
Projects (12.401)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: W912JV-15-2-1001; 2015, W912JV-17-2-1001; 2017,
W912JV-18-2-1001; 2018, W912JV-18-2-1002; 2018,
W912JV-18-2-1021; 2018, W912JV-19-2-1001; 2019,
W912JV-19-2-1002; 2019, W912JV-19-2-1021; 2019
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303(a); 2 CFR 200.302(b)
The Oregon Military Department (department) is responsible for establishing controls to ensure
federal financial reports include all activity of the reporting period, are supported by applicable
accounting records, and are fairly presented in accordance with governing requirements. The
department has not implemented sufficient controls to ensure amounts reported are supported by
accounting records.
The Master Cooperative Agreement (MCA) is separated into appendices that support various
program objectives. For example, there are separate appendices for operations and maintenance,
environmental, and security objectives. The department completes the Request for Advance or
Reimbursement (SF-270) reports by appendix to obtain reimbursement for federal expenditures.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-34-
We reviewed 65 SF-270 reports for fiscal year 2019 and found the following:
 For two reports, the amount reported for cumulative federal expenditures and cumulative
non-federal expenditures did not agree to the accounting records. The department had not
made corrections for known errors related to payroll allocations, which resulted in
overstating federal expenditures in the accounting records. If the errors are not corrected,
the department may inappropriately seek federal reimbursement for unallowable
expenditures.
 For 15 reports, the amount reported for cumulative federal expenditures did not agree to
the accounting records because the department uses a combination of the accounting
records and a subsidiary system as the basis for requesting reimbursement. The subsidiary
system did not include all transactions related to the federal award, and is not reconciled to
the accounting records until appendix close-out. In addition, some expenditures are driven
by construction contracts that span several years, resulting in the reconciliation process
occurring several years after the grant award begins. For example, the department finalized
the operations and maintenance appendix reconciliation for federal fiscal year 2014 during
the 2019 audit period.
The process results in cumulative federal expenditures being understated on the federal
reports and contributes to the department’s cash flow challenges. For example, as of May
2019, for one open appendix the department had approximately $1.7 million of
expenditures recorded in the accounting records for which the department had not sought
reimbursement.
 For 10 reports, we were unable to determine whether the amount reported for cumulative
non-federal expenditures agreed to the accounting records because the department does
not separately account for non-federal expenditures by federal award.
We recommend department management ensure corrections are made in the accounting records
as errors are identified. Additionally, we recommend department management ensure monthly
reconciliations occur between its subsidiary system and accounting records and consider
implementing the use of additional data fields within the accounting system to promote accurate
federal reporting. Finally, we recommend the department separately account for non-federal
expenditures by federal award.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
The Oregon Military Department concurs with the finding and recommendations as outlined in the
letter and above.
The Oregon Military Department (OMD) will undertake the following corrective actions to address the
recommendations made by the Secretary of State's Audits Division and ensure that corrections are
made in the accounting records as errors are identified.
a. Assess the Department's current use of the Statewide Financial Management Application
(SFMA), contact partner state agencies to ascertain if there are
improvements/modifications to how the Department uses SFMA that can be implemented
by OMD.
b. Assess the viability and appropriateness of using iEMS (OMD subsidiary system) as primary
supporting documentation associated with SF-270's.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-35-
c. Ensure that Datamart queries are included as the PRIMARY supporting documentation
validating both Federal and Non-Federal share of requested reimbursements.
d. Create a new monthly reconciliation process between the Financial Administration Division
(AGC) Senior Master Cooperative Agreement (MCA) Accountant and the Installation Division
(AGI) Budget Analyst.
i.  This process will focus on ensuring the SFMA and the iEMS system are reconciled to
each other each month. Should there be reconciling items found the requirement will
be that those items be addressed/corrected before the completion of the following
month's reconciliation.
ii. A copy of the completed reconciliation document will be signed by both the AGC Senior
MCA Accountant and the AGI Budget Analyst and stored electronically in the
appropriate files.
iii. A calendar will be developed identifying dates for reconciliations to occur.
e.   A Grant #/Phase will be applied to all non-federal funds PCA's which will match the Grant
#/Phase associated with corresponding federal funds PCA's.
Anticipated Completion Date:
Items a & b listed above will be complete no later than 31 May 2020.
i. With regards to item a, the Military Department is scheduled to meet with the
Department of Human Service Grants Management Team on 12 March 2020 to discuss
SFMA functionality.
ii. With regards to item b, a joint opinion will be rendered by the Chief Financial Officer
and the Director of Installations regarding the future use of iEMS as it relates its role in
SF-270 reimbursements. A copy of this opinion will be shared with the Secretary of
State's Audits Division.
Item c listed above will be complete no later than 30 April 2020.
Item d listed above will be completed no later than 31 May 2020, but the actual reconciliations will not
occur until the hire of a new Budget Analyst within the Installations Division is complete. All months
that transpire between the creation of the reconciliation process and the hire date will be retroactively
completed.
Item e listed above will be completed no later than 30 June 2020 to ensure State Fiscal Year 2021 and
Federal Fiscal Year 2021 are coded correctly. It will be our goal to retroactively correct both federal
and non-federal PCA's for State Fiscal Year 2020 and Federal Fiscal Year 2020.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-36-
2019-022 Oregon Military Department
Strengthen Controls to Ensure Expenditures Do Not Exceed Obligated Amounts
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Defense
Program Title and CFDA Number: National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance
Projects (12.401)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: W912JV-13-2-1001; 2013
Compliance Requirement: Period of Performance
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $230,656 (known)
Criteria: National Guard Regulations 5-1, Chapter 11
Federal regulations require a written request to keep an appendix open when unliquidated
obligations will remain 90 days or more after the close of the federal fiscal year. The request should
include a consolidated, detailed listing of all unliquidated obligations and a projected timetable for
their disbursement. Subsequent requests are to be submitted by the department every 90 days or so
thereafter as long as there are unliquidated claims. Federal regulations also state that costs incurred
in a fiscal year that are not disclosed by the department shall not be eligible for reimbursement.
The Master Cooperative Agreement (MCA) is separated into appendices that support various
program objectives. For example, there are separate appendices for operations and maintenance,
environmental, and security objectives. The department separates the unliquidated obligations
listings by federal fiscal year and appendix.
For construction contracts that exceed one federal fiscal year and or include multiple federal fiscal
years of funding, the department maintains spreadsheets that track budgeted and actual amounts by
federal fiscal year. We judgmentally reviewed eight construction contracts with payments during
the fiscal year and found one contract where expenditures exceeded budgeted amounts by $230,656
and actual payments per the department’s tracking spreadsheet by $789,577.
The department was unable to determine why the accounting records showed contract payments
exceeding budgeted amounts, but thought it was possible that payments were incorrectly recorded
to federal fiscal years.
We recommend department management ensure construction tracking sheets are appropriately
reconciled to the accounting records to ensure payments do not exceed budgeted amounts.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
The Oregon Military Department concurs with the finding and recommendation outlined in the letter
and above.
The Oregon Military Department will undertake the following corrective actions to address the
recommendations made by the Secretary of State's Audits Division:
a. Create a monthly reconciliation meeting between Construction Project Managers, Installations
Division Budget Analyst, the Senior Master Cooperative Agreement Accountant, and the Senior
Debt Accountant.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-37-
i. This process will focus on ensuring SFMA, the iEMS system, and Construction
Project Management Spreadsheets are reconciled to each other each month. Should
there be reconciling items found the requirement will be that those items be
addressed/corrected before the completion of the following month's reconciliation.
ii. A copy of the completed reconciliation document will be signed by Construction
Project Managers, the Senior MCA Accountant and the Budget Officer and stored
electronically in the appropriate files.
iii. A calendar will be developed identifying dates for reconciliations to occur.
Anticipated Completion Date: The item listed above will be completed no later than 31 May 2020, but
the actual reconciliations will not occur until the hire of a new Budget Analyst within the Installations
Division is complete. All months that transpire between the creation of the reconciliation process and
the hire date will be retroactively completed.
2019-023 Department of Human Services
Improve Documentation of Monitoring of Administrative Costs
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Agriculture – Food and Nutrition
Services
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Food Distribution Cluster (10.565, 10.568)
Federal Award Numbers and Year:  197OROR2Y8005; 2019, 197OROR2Y8105; 2019
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed, Allowable Costs/Cost
Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria:  2 CFR 200.403; 7 CFR 247.25; 7 CFR 251.10
Federal regulations state that costs under federal awards be necessary to ensure the efficient and
effective administration of the program. Additionally, they state that eligible recipient agencies
maintain adequate records for allowable administrative costs and that the state agency monitor the
operation of the program to ensure it is administered in accordance with federal and state
requirements.
For fiscal year 2019, the department passed through all administrative funding to the recipient
agency, totaling $1.3 million or 7.36% of total expenditures. Throughout the year the department
received invoices from the recipient listing administrative charges by category such as staffing,
supplies, and rent. No detail or additional support was provided by the recipient to support the
charges.
According to the department, they approve invoices for payment if funding is available and costs
appear allowable. In addition, their on-site monitoring process includes a review of recipient
invoices submitted for reimbursement, but there was no evidence invoices were reviewed.
Without detail to support the charges and no documented on-site review of recipient invoices, there
is a risk that the department is reimbursing the recipient for administrative costs that are not
supported or allowable.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-38-
We recommend department management review adequate support for administrative charges and
revise the monitoring checklist to demonstrate that on-site monitoring of invoices is done.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with the finding.
TEFAP – The Department is currently working with Food and Nutrition Services (FNS) partners to
update three required monitoring tools for TEFAP and CSFP. Per federal requirements the monitoring
schedule for TEFAP is one annual storage facility review and one quadrennial comprehensive review of
the sub-recipient agency, OFB. The Department will make corrections and updates to the current
annual storage facility review tool per FNS and SOS guidance to meet the recommendation for
documenting specific records reviewed during on site monitoring. The department will create and
implement a quadrennial comprehensive review tool with FNS guidance and partnership. The
Department will receive FNS approval on the finalized monitoring tools.
CSFP – Per federal requirements the monitoring schedule for CSFP is to complete a biennial inventory
and compliance review of the sub-recipient agency, OFB. The department will continue to work with
FNS to update and correct the biennial monitoring tool to reflect FNS and SOS guidance to meet the
recommendation for documenting specific records reviewed during on site monitoring. The
Department will receive FNS approval on the finalized monitoring tools.
Anticipated Completion Date:
TEFAP – The Department plans to have these monitoring tools completed by April 2020
for implementation this FFY2020. The Department plans to conduct its on-site annual
storage facility review by the end of June 2020.
CSFP – The Department plans to have these monitoring tools completed by April 2020 for
implementation this FFY20.
2019-024 Oregon State Police
Strengthen Controls for Verifying Suspension and Debarment
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Program Title and CFDA Number:  Fire Management Assistance Grant (97.046)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: FEMA 5255FM-OR; 2018, FEMA 5256FM-OR; 2018, FEMA
5265FM-OR; 2018, FEMA 5274FM-OR; 2018, FEMA
5275FM-OR; 2018
Compliance Requirement:  Suspension and Debarment
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria:  2 CFR 180.220; 2 CFR 180.300
Federal regulations prohibit recipients of federal awards from using federal funds to pay for goods
and services if the vendor is suspended or debarred. This requirement includes procurement
contracts and non-procurement transactions that are expected to exceed $25,000. These regulations
require the state to verify that the vendor is not suspended, debarred, or otherwise excluded from
participating before submitting the cost for federal reimbursement.
Office of the Secretary of State, Audits Division
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-39-
The majority of the department’s Fire Management Assistance Grant program expenditures were
non-procurement agreements. These agreements do not go through the department’s formal
procurement process.
Of the 21 vendors selected for testing, 13 had total expenditures in fiscal year 2019 that met the
threshold of $25,000, and required the department to verify suspension and debarment. We found
the department did not verify or document verification of suspension and debarment for any of the
13 vendors. In the vendor population as a whole, 79 of the 201 vendors met the threshold for
suspension and debarment verification. As part of our planned test procedures, we searched the
federal System for Award Management for each selected vendor. We found no vendors in our
sample that were suspended or debarred.
Management stated that it had performed the verification for one of the vendors, but the verification
was not documented. Additionally, the department’s procedures for non-procurement agreements
do not require a vendor’s status to be verified.
Making payments to a vendor shown on the federal suspended or debarred vendor list could lead
the department to contract with a vendor that is prohibited from participating in federal programs.
The state could also be required to repay any federal monies it used to cover the costs associated
with suspended or debarred vendors.
We recommend department management strengthen existing controls to include verification of
suspension and debarment for vendors with non-procurement agreements that equal or exceed
$25,000. We further recommend the department maintain evidence demonstrating the verification
was performed.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
Oregon State Police agrees with the findings and recommendation.
Effective February 27, 2020, OSP has developed an internal procedure to address the deficiency.
Attached to this response is a procedure that strengthens the department's internal controls for
verification of Suspension and Debarment.
Anticipated Completion Date: February 27, 2020
-40-
-41-
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of
Federal Awards
For the Year Ended
June 30, 2019
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                Pass-Through             Passed-Through   Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number Program or Cluster Title                                                   Identifying Number        to Subrecipients   Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-42-
Department of Agriculture
10.001 Agricultural Research Basic and Applied Research  $ -  $  648  $  648
10.025 Plant and Animal Disease, Pest Control, and Animal Care    62,208   2,598,651
Pass Through From:  Oregon State University 4575900000000        11,619
Total 10.025        2,672,478
10.069 Conservation Reserve Program   62,665   -   62,665
10.093 Voluntary Public Access and Habitat Incentive Program   -   667,471   667,471
10.170 Specialty Crop Block Grant Program - Farm Bill    1,371,922   504,075    1,875,997
10.171 Organic Certification Cost Share Programs   -   276,395   276,395
10.178 Trade Mitigation Program Eligible Recipient Agency Operational Funds   320,000   -   320,000
10.290 Agricultural Market and Economic Research   -   -
Pass Through From:  USDA Forest Service 99999999999        20,859
Total 10.290       20,859
10.534 CACFP Meal Service Training Grants   -   47,027   47,027
10.557 WIC Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children    16,227,511    45,657,593    61,885,104
10.558 Child and Adult Care Food Program    34,494,728   717,788    35,212,516
10.560 State Administrative Expenses for Child Nutrition   488,104    2,790,849    3,278,953
10.574 Team Nutrition Grants   -   29,165   29,165
10.575 Farm to School Grant Program   48,899   25,246   74,145
10.576 Senior Farmers Market Nutrition Program   -   774,380   774,380
10.578 WIC Grants to States (WGS)   -   1,599   1,599
10.579 Child Nutrition Discretionary Grants Limited Availability   173,367    3,663,451    3,836,818
10.582 Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program    2,467,820   10,911    2,478,731
10.652 Forestry Research   -   74,376   74,376
10.664 Cooperative Forestry Assistance   193,170    5,467,996    5,661,166
10.674 Wood Utilization Assistance   -   122,302   122,302
10.676 Forest Legacy Program   -   51,157   51,157
10.678 Forest Stewardship Program   -   240,011   240,011
10.680 Forest Health Protection   -    1,091,076    1,091,076
10.691 Good Neighbor Authority   -   714,868   714,868
10.703 Cooperative Fire Protection Agreement   -   8,934   8,934
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-43-
10.902 Soil and Water Conservation   -    718,646
Pass Through From:  American Forest Foundation 15212351240        38,032
Total 10.902       756,678
10.912 Environmental Quality Incentives Program   5,473   132,366   137,839
10.U01 15PA11060400016   -   36,064   36,064
10.U02 17GN11060400022   -   5,412   5,412
10.U03 2014CS11061500006   -   83,544   83,544
10.U04 68 0436 1600 23   -   282,555   282,555
10.U05 SPA 17GN11061600024   -   5,511   5,511
10.U06 WRP66043617015   -   18,407   18,407
SNAP Cluster
10.551 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program  $ -  $  893,462,929  $  893,462,929
10.561 State Administrative Matching Grants for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program   466,691    108,198,962    108,665,653
Total SNAP Cluster  $ 466,691  $ 1,001,661,891  $ 1,002,128,582
Child Nutrition Cluster
10.553 School Breakfast Program  $  38,046,894  $ 333,323  $  38,380,217
10.555 National School Lunch Program    126,623,224   680,694    127,303,918
10.556 Special Milk Program for Children   79,576   -   79,576
10.559 Summer Food Service Program for Children    5,338,890   189,610    5,528,500
Total Child Nutrition Cluster  $  170,088,584  $  1,203,627  $  171,292,211
Food Distribution Cluster
10.565 Commodity Supplemental Food Program  $ 634,385  $ -  $ 634,385
10.568 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Administrative Costs)    1,156,268   -    1,156,268
10.569 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Food Commodities)    15,564,317   -    15,564,317
Total Food Distribution Cluster  $  17,354,970  $ -  $  17,354,970
Total Department of Agriculture  $  243,826,112  $ 1,069,754,502  $ 1,313,580,614
Department of Commerce
11.012 Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS)  $ -  $ -  $
Pass Through From: University of Washington 700000000     23,485
Pass Through From: University of Washington 1916001537        55,891
Total 11.012       79,376
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-44-
11.407 Interjurisdictional Fisheries Act of 1986   -   -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        185,944
Total 11.407       185,944
11.419 Coastal Zone Management Administration Awards    35,981   2,067,198
Pass Through From: Regents of the University of Michigan 138600630        88,756
Total 11.419        2,191,935
11.420 Coastal Zone Management Estuarine Research Reserves   52,972   745,328   798,300
11.436 Columbia River Fisheries Development Program      5,770,026    5,770,026
11.437 Pacific Fisheries Data Program   -   -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       1,255,518
Total 11.437        1,255,518
11.438 Pacific Coast Salmon Recovery Pacific Salmon Treaty Program   7,866,903   8,459,854
Pass Through From: Pacific Salmon Commission 9909840528        12,937
Total 11.438        16,339,694
11.439 Marine Mammal Data Program   -   -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        160,119
Total 11.438       160,119
11.441 Regional Fishery Management Councils   -   -
Pass Through From: North Pacific Fishery Mgmt Con 920060367     72,921
Pass Through From: Pacific Fishery Mgmt Council 910982918        140,146
Total 11.441       213,067
11.467 Meteorologic and Hydrologic Modernization Development   -   451,343   451,343
11.472 Unallied Science Program   -   141,770   141,770
11.473 Office for Coastal Management   31,925   202,606   234,531
11.478 Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research Coastal Ocean Program   -   60,196   60,196
11.U01 1305M318PNFFS0231   -   8,706   8,706
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-45-
11.U02 19 136G   -   -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        5,658
Total 11.U02       5,658
11.U03 1918G   -  -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376   -     57,976
Total 11.U03       57,976
Economic Development Cluster
11.307 Economic Adjustment Assistance  $ -  $  8,596,724  $  8,596,724
Total Economic Development Cluster  $ -  $  8,596,724  $  8,596,724
Total Department of Commerce  $  7,987,781  $  28,563,102  $  36,550,883
Department of Defense
12.106 Flood Control Projects  $ 25,103  $ 477,279  $ $502,382
12.113 State Memorandum of Agreement Program for the Reimbursement of Technical Services   -   26,107   26,107
12.400 Military Construction, National Guard   -    5,169,537   5,169,537
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Projects   -    51,010,843   51,010,843
12.404 National Guard ChalleNGe Program   -    5,748,336   5,748,336
12.U01 1987P   -   -
Pass Through From: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        186,012
Total 12.U01       186,012
12.U02 W911SR1320002   -   17,380   17,380
12.U03 W9127N 12 2 0005   -   4,078   4,078
12.U04 W9127N 122 0004 1013   -   4,591   4,591
12.U05 W9127N10200080032   -   (1,454)  (1,454)
12.U06 W9127N10200080033   -    293   293
12.U07 W9127N10200080035   -    (228)  (228)
12.U08 W9127N10200080036   -   2,422   2,422
12.U09 W9127N10200080037   -   75,830   75,830
12.U10 W9127N12200044001   -   (21,241)  (21,241)
12.U11 W9127N12200044003   -   30,002   30,002
12.U12 W9127N12200044004   -   21,242   21,242
12.U13 W9127N12200044018   -   19,706   19,706
12.U14 W9127N12200044020   -   6,413   6,413
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-46-
12.U15 W9127N1320002   -    307   307
12.U16 W9127N14200090005   -   211,157   211,157
Total Department of Defense  $ 25,103  $  62,988,612  $  63,013,715
Department of Housing and Urban Development
14.228 Community Development Block Grants/State's program and Non-Entitlement Grants in
Hawaii  $  13,581,681  $ 162,864  $  13,744,545
14.231 Emergency Solutions Grant Program    1,761,933   65,253    1,827,186
14.239 Home Investment Partnerships Program    1,498,263    2,580,241    4,078,504
14.241 Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS   416,383   967,694    1,384,077
14.256 ARRA - Neighborhood Stabilization Program   -   16,000   16,000
14.267 Continuum of Care Program   -   93,386   93,386
14.275 Housing Trust Fund   2,250   228,848   231,098
14.326 Project Rental Assistance Demonstration (PRA Demo) Program of Section811
Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities   -   50,359   50,359
14.400 Equal Opportunity in Housing   -    36    36
14.U01 B08DN410001   -   43,665   43,665
Total Department of Housing and Urban Development  $  17,260,510  $  4,208,346  $  21,468,856
Department of the Interior
15.035 Forestry on Indian Lands  $ -  $ 45,825  $ 45,825
15.214 Non-Sale Disposals of Mineral Material   70,739   -   70,739
15.223 Recreation and Visitor Services   -   39,428   39,428
15.225 Recreation and Visitor Services   63,452   20,182   83,634
15.228 BLM Wildland Urban Interface Community Fire Assistance   25,452   4,176   29,628
15.230 Invasive and Noxious Plant Management   -   374,076   374,076
15.231 Fish, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Resource Management   -   299,362   299,362
15.234 Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination   -    118,057
Pass Through From:  Josephine County 1936002300        67,027
Total 15.234       185,084
15.236 Environmental Quality and Protection   -   4,340   4,340
15.237 Rangeland Resource Management   -   847,000   847,000
15.504 Title XVI Water Reclamation and Reuse   -   126,711   126,711
15.517 Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act   -    472    472
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-47-
15.614 Coastal Wetlands Planning, Protection and Restoration   739,489   61,451   800,940
15.615 Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund   854,494   988,946    1,843,440
15.616 Clean Vessel Act   342,388   77,127   419,515
15.622 Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act   66,345    11   66,356
15.626 Enhanced Hunter Education and Safety   31,154   31,154   62,308
15.630 Coastal Program   -   10,195   10,195
15.634 State Wildlife Grants   -   1,600,071
Pass Through From:  Center for Natural Lands Management 680233573        48,136
Total 15.634        1,648,207
15.653 National Outreach and Communication   -   -
Pass Through From:  Recreational Boating and Fishing Foundation 0541915490        12,428
Total 15.653       12,428
15.655 Migratory Bird Monitoring, Assessment and Conservation   -   9,810   9,810
15.657 Endangered Species Conservation - Recovery Implementation Funds   -   234,217   234,217
15.661 Lower Snake River Compensation Plan   -    4,970,598    4,970,598
15.666 Endangered Species Conservation-Wolf Livestock Loss Compensation and Prevention   61,300   -   61,300
15.807 Earthquake Hazards Program Assistance   -   (4,685)
Pass Through From:  University of Oregon 1936015767        10,626
Total 15.807       5,941
15.808 U.S. Geological Survey Research and Data Collection   -   30,855   30,855
15.810 National Cooperative Geologic Mapping   -   174,831   174,831
15.814 National Geological and Geophysical Data Preservation   -    560    560
15.817 National Geospatial Program:  Building The National Map   -   44,070   44,070
15.904 Historic Preservation Fund Grants-In-Aid   185,307   695,407   880,714
15.916 Outdoor Recreation Acquisition, Development and Planning    1,050,923   227,070    1,277,993
15.U01 632171909   -   10,000   10,000
15.U02 F17AF01317   -   78,027   78,027
15.U03 IPA   -   58,488   58,488
15.U04 L09AC16024L14AC00034   -    300    300
15.U05 L16AC00352   -    333    333
15.U06 ODOT 30952   -    (116)   (116)
15.U07 P16AP00123   20,800   2,252   23,052
15.U08 R13AP13007A   -    52    52
15.U09 R18AP00012   -   168,561   168,561
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-48-
15.U10 USFW AGMT NAT HERIT   -   205,960   205,960
15.U11 UWFW AGMT NAT HERITG   -   1,200   1,200
Fish and Wildlife Cluster
15.605 Sport Fish Restoration  $ 319,724  $  8,256,281  $  8,576,005
15.611 Wildlife Restoration and Basic Hunter Education   -    16,918,353    16,918,353
Total Fish and Wildlife Cluster  $ 319,724  $  25,174,634  $  25,494,358
Total Department of the Interior  $  3,831,567  $  36,869,225  $  40,700,792
Department of Justice
16.017 Sexual Assault Services Formula Program  $ 243,172  $ 32,127  $ 275,299
16.021 Justice Systems Response to Families   -   11,470   11,470
16.321 Antiterrorism Emergency Reserve   285,848   56,855   342,703
16.540 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention   96,068   297,959   394,027
16.543 Missing Children's Assistance   -   328,849   328,849
16.550 State Justice Statistics Program for Statistical Analysis Centers   -   71,659   71,659
16.554 National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP)   247,340   683,550   930,890
16.575 Crime Victim Assistance    19,210,248    1,277,064    20,487,312
16.576 Crime Victim Compensation   -   839,774   839,774
16.582 Crime Victim Assistance/Discretionary Grants   82,973   31,458   114,431
16.585 Drug Court Discretionary Grant Program   -    -
Pass Through From:  Harney County 1023     19,176
Pass Through From:  Josephine County 1018        4,337
Total 16.585       23,513
16.588 Violence Against Women Formula Grants    1,598,599   264,208    1,862,807
16.590 Grants to Encourage Arrest Policies and Enforcement of Protection Orders Program   -   -
Pass Through From:  Clackamas Women's Services 1045        51,190
Total 16.590       51,190
16.593 Residential Substance Abuse Treatment for State Prisoners   122,813   4,303   127,116
16.595 Community Capacity Development Office   -   113,334   113,334
16.606 State Criminal Alien Assistance Program   -    2,318,973    2,318,973
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-49-
16.738 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program    7,460    548,094
Pass Through From:  Wallowa County 1048     6,765
Pass Through From:  Criminal Justice Commission 1039     586,695
Pass Through From:  Lincoln County 1028     61,059
Pass Through From:  Multnomah County 1020     154,130
Pass Through From:  Crook County 1015     120,913
Pass Through From:  Linn County 1009        55,153
Total 16.738        1,540,269
16.741 DNA Backlog Reduction Program   -   745,029   745,029
16.742 Paul Coverdell Forensic Sciences Improvement Grant Program   -   310,265   310,265
16.750 Support for Adam Walsh Act Implementation Grant Program   -   182,052   182,052
16.751 Edward Byrne Memorial Competitive Grant Program   -   46,223   46,223
16.754 Harold Rogers Prescription Drug Monitoring Program   -    (22)   (22)
16.813 NICS Act Record Improvement Program   -   316,692   316,692
16.816 John R. Justice Prosecutors and Defenders Incentive Act   -   71,192   71,192
16.827 Justice Reinvestment Initiative   402,419   -   402,419
16.922 Equitable Sharing Program   -   429,439   429,439
16.U01 2018IGBX0005   -   101,548   101,548
Total Department of Justice  $  22,296,940   $   10,141,513   $   32,438,453
Department of Labor
17.002 Labor Force Statistics  $ -  $  1,345,886  $  1,345,886
17.005 Compensation and Working Conditions   -   153,271   153,271
17.225 ARRA - Unemployment Insurance   -   302,928   302,928
17.225 Unemployment Insurance   -    560,285,597    560,285,597
17.235 Senior Community Service Employment Program    1,125,396   33,686    1,159,082
17.245 Trade Adjustment Assistance   -    13,822,523    13,822,523
17.268 H-1B Job Training Grants   329,322   176,952   506,274
17.271 Work Opportunity Tax Credit Program (WOTC)   -   87,328   87,328
17.273 Temporary Labor Certification for Foreign Workers   -   404,992   404,992
17.277 WIOA National Dislocated Worker Grants / WIA National Emergency Grants   645,451   120,146   765,597
17.281 WIOA Dislocated Worker National Reserve Technical Assistance and Training   -   1,783   1,783
17.285 Apprenticeship USA Grants   470,486   372,572   843,058
17.503 Occupational Safety and Health State Program   -    6,962,404    6,962,404
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-50-
Employment Service Cluster
17.207 Employment Service/Wagner-Peyser Funded Activities  $ -  $  2,413,551  $  2,413,551
17.801 Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP)   -    3,039,692    3,039,692
Total Employment Service Cluster  $ -  $  5,453,243  $  5,453,243
WIOA
Cluster
17.258 WIOA Adult Program  $  8,109,782  $  1,030,778  $  9,140,560
17.259 WIOA Youth Activities    9,033,713   286,982    9,320,695
17.278 WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grants    11,281,235    1,900,736    13,181,971
Total WIOA Cluster  $  28,424,730  $  3,218,496  $  31,643,226
Total Department of Labor  $  30,995,385  $  592,741,807  $  623,737,192
Department of Transportation
20.106 Airport Improvement Program  $ -  $  2,379,938  $  2,379,938
20.200 Highway Research and Development Program   180,886   -   180,886
20.301 Railroad Safety   -   40,604   40,604
20.319 ARRA - High-Speed Rail Corridors and Intercity Passenger Rail Service - Capital
Assistance Grants   210,594   123,745   334,339
20.321 Railroad Safety Technology Grants   -   454,875   454,875
20.505 Metropolitan Transportation Planning and State and Non-Metropolitan Planning and
Research   84,107   18,835   102,942
20.509 Formula Grants for Rural Areas and Tribal Transit Program    12,516,854    2,182,603    14,699,457
20.528 Rail Fixed Guideway Public Transportation System State Safety Oversight Formula
Grant Program   -   517,124   517,124
20.608 Minimum Penalties for Repeat Offenders for Driving While Intoxicated   492,553   795,838    1,288,391
20.614 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Discretionary Safety Grants
and Cooperative Agreements   -   88,419   88,419
20.700 Pipeline Safety Program State Base Grant   -   436,293   436,293
20.703 Interagency Hazardous Materials Public Sector Training and Planning Grants   126,655   141,506   268,161
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-51-
Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
20.205 Highway Planning and Construction  $ 40,105,345  $ 563,789,498  $
Pass Through From:  Oregon State University 1611730890       9,164
Total 20.205        603,904,007
20.219 Recreational Trails Program    1,507,564   340,379    1,847,943
20.224 Federal Lands Access Program   770,231   473,778    1,244,009
Total Highway Planning and Construction Cluster  $  42,383,140  $  564,612,819  $  606,995,959
Federal Transit Cluster
20.500 Federal Transit Capital Investment Grants  $ 16,025  $ -  $ 16,025
20.526 Bus and Bus Facilities Formula Program    2,083,897   -    2,083,897
Total Federal Transit Cluster  $  2,099,922  $ -  $  2,099,922
Highway Safety Cluster
20.600 State and Community Highway Safety  $ 919,944  $  1,742,867  $  2,662,811
20.611 Incentive Grant Program to Prohibit Racial Profiling   -   722,781   722,781
20.616 National Priority Safety Programs    1,200,041    1,323,196    2,523,237
Total Highway Safety Cluster  $  2,119,985  $  3,788,844  $  5,908,829
Transit Services Programs Cluster
20.513 Enhanced Mobility of Seniors and Individuals with Disabilities  $  12,106,627  $  1,169,478  $  13,276,105
Total Transit Services Programs Cluster  $  12,106,627  $  1,169,478  $  13,276,105
Total Department of Transportation  $  72,321,323  $  576,750,921  $  649,072,244
Department of the Treasury
21.U01 ASSET FORFEITURE  $ -  $ 663,381  $ 663,381
21.U02 NFMC   -   6,175   6,175
21.U03 PROJECT REINVEST   387,616   9,540   397,156
Total Department of the Treasury  $ 387,616  $ 679,096  $  1,066,712
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
30.001 Employment Discrimination Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964  $ -  $ 427,472  $ 427,472
Total Equal Employment Opportunity Commission  $ -  $ 427,472  $ 427,472
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-52-
General Services Administration
39.002 Disposal of Federal Surplus Real Property  $ 39,107  $ -  $ 39,107
39.003 Donation of Federal Surplus Personal Property    3,732,939   165,767    3,898,706
Total General Services Administration  $  3,772,046  $ 165,767  $  3,937,813
National Endowment for the Arts
45.025 Promotion of the Arts Partnership Agreements  $ 689,908  $ 30,000  $ 719,908
Total National Endowment for the Arts  $ 689,908  $ 30,000  $ 719,908
Institute Of Museum and Library Services
45.310 Grants to States  $  1,190,581  $  1,426,179  $  2,616,760
Total Institute Of Museum and Library Services  $  1,190,581  $  1,426,179  $  2,616,760
Small Business Administration
59.061 State Trade Expansion  $ 462,817  $ 19,070  $ 481,887
Total Small Business Administration  $ 462,817  $ 19,070  $ 481,887
Department of Veterans Affairs
64.015 Veterans State Nursing Home Care  $ -  $  22,526,497  $  22,526,497
64.035 Veterans Transportation Program   401,158   49,025   450,183
64.053 Payments to States for Programs to Promote the Hiring and Retention of Nurses at State
Veterans Homes   -   (29,771)  (29,771)
Total Department of Veterans Affairs  $ 401,158  $  22,545,751  $  22,946,909
Environmental Protection Agency
66.032 State Indoor Radon Grants  $ -  $ 51,541  $ 51,541
66.034 Surveys, Studies, Research, Investigations, Demonstrations, and Special Purpose
Activities Relating to the Clean Air Act   112,219    1,499,224    1,611,443
66.040 State Clean Diesel Grant Program   82,721   12,854   95,575
66.202 Congressionally Mandated Projects   -   2,526   2,526
66.432 State Public Water System Supervision   17,481    1,670,393    1,687,874
66.454 Water Quality Management Planning   -   183,000   183,000
66.460 Nonpoint Source Implementation Grants   253,585   19,028   272,613
66.461 Regional Wetland Program Development Grants   -   138,541   138,541
66.472 Beach Monitoring and Notification Program Implementation Grants   -   333,680   333,680
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-53-
66.605 Performance Partnership Grants   -    4,948,631    4,948,631
66.608 Environmental Information Exchange Network Grant Program and Related Assistance   148,000   108,356   256,356
66.700 Consolidated Pesticide Enforcement Cooperative Agreements   -   454,473   454,473
66.707 TSCA Title IV State Lead Grants Certification of Lead-Based Paint Professionals   -   288,469   288,469
66.708 Pollution Prevention Grants Program   53,829   47,857   101,686
66.802 Superfund State, Political Subdivision, and Indian Tribe Site-Specific Cooperative
Agreements   -   274,699   274,699
66.804 Underground Storage Tank Prevention, Detection and Compliance Program   -   378,045   378,045
66.805 Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Corrective Action Program   -    1,056,879    1,056,879
66.809 Superfund State and Indian Tribe Core Program Cooperative Agreements   -   102,929   102,929
66.817 State and Tribal Response Program Grants   -   885,814   885,814
66.818 Brownfields Assessment and Cleanup Cooperative Agreements   3,611   12,431   16,042
Clean Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
66.458 Capitalization Grants for Clean Water State Revolving Funds  $  11,397,295  $ -  $  11,397,295
Total Clean Water State Revolving Fund Cluster  $  11,397,295  $ -  $  11,397,295
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
66.468 Capitalization Grants for Drinking Water State Revolving Funds  $  7,694,031  $  3,569,609  $  11,263,640
Total Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Cluster  $  7,694,031  $  3,569,609  $  11,263,640
Total Environmental Protection Agency  $  19,762,772   $   16,038,979   $   35,801,751
Department of Energy
81.041 State Energy Program  $ -  $ 533,320  $ 533,320
81.042 Weatherization Assistance for Low-Income Persons    2,871,159   324,920    3,196,079
81.087 Renewable Energy Research and Development   -  -
Pass Through From:  Clean Energy Alliance 102    47,991    -
Total 81.087       47,991
81.104 Environmental Remediation and Waste Processing and Disposal   -   1,733   1,733
81.106 Transport of Transuranic Wastes to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant:  States and Tribal
Concerns, Proposed Solutions   -   -
Pass Through From:  Western Governor's Alliance 45       84,970
Total 81.106       84,970
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-54-
81.117 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Information Dissemination, Outreach, Training
and Technical Analysis/Assistance    -   -
Pass Through From:  Washington State University 103     1,431
Pass Through From:  WA State Dept of Commerce 6000        35,315
Total 81.117       36,746
81.214 Environmental Monitoring/Cleanup, Cultural and Resource Mgmt., Emergency Response
Research, Outreach, Technical Analysis   11,200   919,474   930,674
81.U01 77347   815,664   120,415   936,079
81.U02 19106G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        240,915
Total 81.U02       240,915
81.U03 1911G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        385,613
Total 81.U03       385,613
81.U04 1939G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        491,833
Total 81.U04       491,833
81.U05 1971G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        21,816
Total 81.U05       21,816
81.U06 1973G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        120,422
Total 81.U06       120,422
81.U07 1979G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        37,872
Total 81.U07       37,872
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-55-
81.U08 1997G   -   -
Pass Through From:  Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        875,357
Total 81.U08       875,357
81.U09 402 00   -   -
Pass Through From:  Confed Tribes Umatilla Indian 930624734        73,264
Total 81.U09       73,264
81.U10 402 000   -   -
Pass Through From:  Confed Tribes Umatilla Indian 930624734        1,999
Total 81.U10       1,999
81.U11 628722007 404 00   -    (445)   (445)
81.U12 70589   668,432   47,847   716,279
81.U13 74313   -   474,749   474,749
81.U14 74313REL16   -   4,694   4,694
81.U15 74313REL19   -   270,136   270,136
81.U16 74313REL22   -   198,883   198,883
81.U17 74313REL23   -   56,037   56,037
81.U18 74313REL30   -   162,449   162,449
81.U19 74313REL31   -   74,671   74,671
81.U20 74313REL32   -   76,772   76,772
81.U21 74313REL33   -    1,436,186    1,436,186
81.U22 74313REL34   -    1,015,079    1,015,079
81.U23 74313REL35   -   500,066   500,066
81.U24 74313REL36   -   129,313   129,313
81.U25 74313REL37   -   170,728   170,728
81.U26 74313REL38   -   144,904   144,904
81.U27 74313REL39   -   892,274   892,274
81.U28 74313REL40   -   599,929   599,929
81.U29 74313REL42   -    1,316,374    1,316,374
81.U30 74313REL43   -   187,021   187,021
81.U31 74313REL44   -    1,122,156    1,122,156
81.U32 74313REL45   -   151,614   151,614
81.U33 74313REL46   -   575,290   575,290
81.U34 74313REL47   -   365,297   365,297
81.U35 74313REL48   -   413,954   413,954
81.U36 74313REL49   -   839,241   839,241
81.U37 74313REL50   -   945,486   945,486
81.U38 74313REL51   -   546,749   546,749
81.U39 74313REL52   -   101,189   101,189
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-56-
81.U40 74313REL53   -   133,362   133,362
81.U41 74313REL55   -   808,549   808,549
81.U42 74313REL7   -   (1,854)  (1,854)
81.U43 7433REL38   -   27,689   27,689
81.U44 75382   -   81,258   81,258
81.U45 T1864219   -   -
Pass Through From:  Confed Tribes Warm Springs Ind 390383362        18,814
Total 18.U45       18,814
Total Department of Energy  $  4,414,446  $  18,157,130  $  22,571,576
Department of Education
84.002 Adult Education - Basic Grants to States  $  4,232,647  $ 738,952  $  4,971,599
84.010 Title I Grants to Local Educational Agencies    141,914,634    2,421,286    144,335,920
84.011 Migrant Education State Grant Program    17,874,805    1,570,587    19,445,392
84.013 Title I State Agency Program for Neglected and Delinquent Children and Youth    1,324,854   25,937    1,350,791
84.048 Career and Technical Education 0 Basic Grants to States    11,467,558    1,385,161    12,852,719
84.051 Career and Technical Education 0 National Programs   10,278   2,244   12,522
84.126 Rehabilitation Services Vocational Rehabilitation Grants to States    1,385,707    51,979,802    53,365,509
84.169 Independent Living_State Grants   -   (11,470)  (11,470)
84.177 Rehabilitation Services Independent Living Services for Older Individuals Who are Blind   -   527,694   527,694
84.181 Special Education-Grants for Infants and Families    5,390,157   206,549    5,596,706
84.184 School Safety National Activities (formerly, Safe and Drug-Free Schools and
Communities-National Programs   -   40,380   40,380
84.187 Supported Employment Services for Individuals with the Most Significant Disabilities   -   363,748   363,748
84.196 Education for Homeless Children and Youth   669,665   164,932   834,597
84.282 Charter Schools    1,605,327   77,808    1,683,135
84.287 Twenty-First Century Community Learning Centers    10,569,888   463,427    11,033,315
84.323 Special Education - State Personnel Development   964,171   259,963    1,224,134
84.358 Rural Education    1,245,460   59,824    1,305,284
84.365 English Language Acquisition State Grants    7,097,070   396,310    7,493,380
84.366 Mathematics and Science Partnerships   114,717    390   115,107
84.367 Supporting Effective Instruction State Grant (formerly Improving Teacher Quality State
Grants)    17,760,255   589,380    18,349,635
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-57-
84.368 Competitive Grants for State Assessments (formerly Grants for Enhanced Assessment
Instruments)   -   -
Pass Through From:  North Carolina Dept of Ed 3000    27,000     15,279
Total 84.368       42,279
84.369 Grants for State Assessments and Related Activities   -    3,853,030    3,853,030
84.377 School Improvement Grants    1,966,762   272,974    2,239,736
84.424 Student Support and Academic Enrichment Program    6,135,838   53,361    6,189,199
84.U01 77213   -   27,095   27,095
84.U02 EDIES14C0097   -   197,173   197,173
Special Education Cluster (IDEA)
84.027 Special Education Grants to States  $  130,895,109  $  6,801,527  $  137,696,636
84.173 Special Education Preschool Grants    3,467,809   239,523    3,707,332
Total Special Education Cluster (IDEA)  $  134,362,918  $  7,041,050  $  141,403,968
Total Department of Education  $  366,119,711  $  72,722,866  $  438,842,577
Elections Assistance Commission
90.401 Help America Vote Act Requirements Payments  $ -  $  1,517,260  $  1,517,260
90.404 2018 HAVA Election Security Grants   -   496,936   496,936
Total Elections Assistance Commission  $ -  $  2,014,196  $  2,014,196
Department of Health and Human Services
93.041 Special Programs for the Aging, Title VII, Chapter 3, Programs for Prevention of Elder
Abuse, Neglect, and Exploitation  $ 55,411  $ 11,241  $ 66,652
93.042 Special Programs for the Aging, Title VII, Chapter 2, Long Term Care Ombudsman
Services for Older Individuals   -   176,638   176,638
93.043 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part D, Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion Services   361,132   -   361,132
93.048 Special Programs for the Aging, Title IV, and Title II, Discretionary Projects   174,492   350,138   524,630
93.051 Alzheimer's Disease Demonstration Grants to States   -   30,894   30,894
93.052 National Family Caregiver Support, Title III, Part E    2,124,867   196,266    2,321,133
93.066 State Vital Statistics Improvement Program   -   553,521   553,521
93.069 Public Health Emergency Preparedness    4,187,728    5,204,789    9,392,517
93.070 Environmental Public Health and Emergency Response    30,553   1,757,756
Pass Through From:  Benton County 40000000025    (52,510)
Pass Through From:  Multnomah County 40000000010       (13,771)
Total 93.070        1,722,028
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-58-
93.071 Medicare Enrollment Assistance Program   285,884   11,611   297,495
93.073 Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities - Prevention and Surveillance   43,256   220,112   263,368
93.079 Cooperative Agreements to Promote Adolescent Health through School-Based HIV/STD
Prevention and School-Based Surveillance   -   2,863   2,863
93.082 Sodium Reduction in Communities   -   406,194   406,194
93.090 ARRA - Guardianship Assistance   -    784    784
93.090 Guardianship Assistance   -    8,958,586    8,958,586
93.092 Affordable Care Act (ACA) Personal Responsibility Education Program   110,743   314,434   425,177
93.093 Affordable Care Act (ACA) Health Profession Opportunity Grants   -   -
Pass Through From:  Worksystems Inc 37000        7,732
Total 93.093       7,732
93.103 Food and Drug Administration Research   -    1,058,312    1,058,312
93.110 Maternal and Child Health Federal Consolidated Programs   -   113,855   113,855
93.116 Project Grants and Cooperative Agreements for Tuberculosis Control Programs   (15,700)  645,430   629,730
93.127 Emergency Medical Services for Children   -   174,882   174,882
93.130 Cooperative Agreements to States/Territories for the Coordination and Development of
Primary Care Offices   -   189,362   189,362
93.135 Centers for Research and Demonstration for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention   -   -
Pass Through From:  Oregon State University 30000000004       (4,759)
Total 93.135       (4,759)
93.136 Injury Prevention and Control Research and State and Community Based Programs   448,676    2,962,046    3,410,722
93.150 Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (PATH)   639,379   7,540   646,919
93.197 Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Projects, State and Local Childhood Lead
Poisoning Prevention and Surveillance of Blood Lead Levels in Children   37,941   315,590   353,531
93.217 Family Planning Services    1,721,174   979,768    2,700,942
93.235 Title V State Sexual Risk Avoidance Education (Title V State SRAE) Program   -   597,573   597,573
93.236 Grants to States to Support Oral Health Workforce Activities   129,574   169,086   298,660
93.240 State Capacity Building   -   433,424   433,424
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-59-
93.243 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Projects of Regional and National
Significance   2,457,166   2,123,214
Pass Through From:  Benton County 1025        20,335
Total 93.243        4,600,715
93.251 Universal Newborn Hearing Screening   31,495   241,029   272,524
93.262 Occupational Safety and Health Program   248,254   178,495   426,749
93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements   -    51,934,397    51,934,397
93.270 Viral Hepatitis Prevention and Control   -   161,965   161,965
93.275 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services-Access to Recovery   -    1,566,648    1,566,648
93.279 Drug Abuse and Addiction Research Programs   -   -
Pass Through From:  Oregon Health Sciences University 20000000011        53,045
Total 93.279       53,045
93.283 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Investigations and Technical Assistance    84,853    847,180
Pass Through From:  Natl Assoc Chronic Dis Direct 40000000015        278,070
Total 93.283        1,210,103
93.305 PPHF 2018:  Office of Smoking and Health-National State-Based Tobacco Control
Programs-Financed in part by 2018 Prevention and Public Health funds (PPHF)   -    1,000,192    1,000,192
93.317 Emerging Infections Programs   67,597    2,513,209    2,580,806
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases (ELC)   362,728    4,345,988    4,708,716
93.324 State Health Insurance Assistance Program   189,386   369,526   558,912
93.336 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System   -   420,030   420,030
93.354 Public Health Emergency Response:  Cooperative Agreement for Emergency Response:
Public Health Crisis Response   (33,600)  737,194   703,594
93.369 ACL Independent Living State Grants   -   126,523   126,523
93.413 The State Flexibility to Stabilize the Market Grant Program   -   10,840   10,840
93.421 Strengthening Public Health Systems and Services through National Partnerships to
Improve and Protect the Nation's Health   -   -
Pass Through From:  Natl Assoc Chronic Dis Direct 40000000015        78,884
Total 93.421       78,884
93.424 NON-ACA/PPHF Building Capacity of the Public Health System to Improve Population
Health through National Nonprofit Organizations   -  -
Pass Through From:  Cncl of St & Terr Eped (CSTE) 40000000027    18,497     1,860
Total 93.424       20,357
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-60-
93.426 Improving the Health of Americans through Prevention and Management of Diabetes and
Heart Disease and Stroke   -    1,308,748    1,308,748
93.434 Every Student Succeeds Act/Preschool Development Grants   43,399    342   43,741
93.464 ACL Assistive Technology   475,018   2,500   477,518
93.500 Pregnancy Assistance Fund Program   588,751   342,528   931,279
93.505 Affordable Care Act (ACA) Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting
Program   -   (2,394)  (2,394)
93.506 ACA Nationwide Program for National and State Background Checks for Direct Patient
Access Employees of Long Term Care Facilities and Providers   -   91,534   91,534
93.517 Affordable Care Act – Aging and Disability Resource Center   -   49,722   49,722
93.521
The Affordable Care Act:  Building Epidemiology, Laboratory, and Health Information
Systems Capacity in the Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Disease
(ELC) and Emerging Infections Program (EIP) Cooperative Agreements; PPHF   80,143   999,241    1,079,384
93.539 PPHF Capacity Building Assistance to Strengthen Public Health Immunization
Infrastructure and Performance financed in part by Prevention and Public Health Funds    980   98,058   99,038
93.556 Promoting Safe and Stable Families    1,896,645    2,951,983    4,848,628
93.563 Child Support Enforcement    10,453,230    61,445,923    71,899,153
93.566 Refugee and Entrant Assistance State/Replacement Designee Administered Programs   -    1,651,340    1,651,340
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance    34,966,772    1,554,506    36,521,278
93.569 Community Services Block Grant    5,723,846   311,053    6,034,899
93.579 U.S. Repatriation   -   3,538   3,538
93.584 Refugee and Entrant Assistance Targeted Assistance Grants   -   284,450   284,450
93.586 State Court Improvement Program   -   400,206   400,206
93.590 Community-Based Child Abuse Prevention Grants   -    (2,438,722)   (2,438,722)
93.597 Grants to States for Access and Visitation Programs   77,308   20,667   97,975
93.599 Chafee Education and Training Vouchers Program (ETV)   -   964,842   964,842
93.600 Head Start   -   120,268   120,268
93.603 Adoption and Legal Guardianship Incentive Payments   -   381,384   381,384
93.624 ACA - State Innovation Models:  Funding for Model Design and Model Testing
Assistance   -   (2,746)  (2,746)
93.630 Developmental Disabilities Basic Support and Advocacy Grants   -   671,412   671,412
93.643 Children's Justice Grants to States   -   79,851   79,851
93.645 Stephanie Tubbs Jones Child Welfare Services Program   -    2,965,035    2,965,035
93.652 Adoption Opportunities   -   124,915   124,915
93.658 ARRA - Foster Care Title IV-E   -   2,480   2,480
93.658 Foster Care Title IV-E    3,199,844    90,344,704    93,544,548
93.659 ARRA - Adoption Assistance   -    (347)   (347)
93.659 Adoption Assistance   -    33,696,855    33,696,855
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-61-
93.667 Social Services Block Grant    4,920,993    13,947,408    18,868,401
93.669 Child Abuse and Neglect State Grants   -   722,563   722,563
93.671 Family Violence Prevention and Services/Domestic Violence Shelter and Supportive
Services     1,486,734   7,265    1,493,999
93.674 John H. Chafee Foster Care Independence Program for Successful Transition to
Adulthood   -    1,766,078    1,766,078
93.719 Advance Interoperable Health Information Technology Services to Support Health
Information Exchange   -    55    55
93.733 Capacity Building Assistance to Strengthen Public Health Immunization Infrastructure
and Performance – financed in part by the Prevention and Public Health Fund (PPHF)   -   728,834   728,834
93.735 State Public Health Approaches for Ensuring Quitline Capacity – Funded in part by
Prevention and Public Health Funds (PPHF)   -   228,370   228,370
93.738 PPHF:  Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Program financed solely by
Public Prevention and Health Funds   -   -
Pass Through From:  Multnomah County 40000000010        28,695
Total 93.738       28,695
93.747 Elder Abuse Prevention Interventions Program   -   -
Pass Through From:  ABA 1044        5,479
Total 93.747       5,479
93.757 State and Local Public Health Actions to Prevent Obesity, Diabetes, Heart Disease and
Stroke (PPHF)   19,512   463,842   483,354
93.758 Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant funded solely with Prevention and
Public Health Funds (PPHF)   185,046   964,595    1,149,641
93.767 Children's Health Insurance Program   -    309,857,817    309,857,817
93.779 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Research, Demonstrations and
Evaluations   66,818   6,844   73,662
93.788 Opioid STR    8,070,199    2,182,211    10,252,410
93.796 State Survey Certification of Health Care Providers and Suppliers (Title XIX) Medicaid   -    2,106,710    2,106,710
93.800 Organized Approaches to Increase Colorectal Cancer Screening   14,612   836,270   850,882
93.815 Domestic Ebola Supplement to the Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases (ELC)   93,000   556,748   649,748
93.817 Hospital Preparedness Program (HPP) Ebola Preparedness and Response Activities   53,105   76,680   129,785
93.870 Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Grant Program   6,244,561   2,135,996
Pass Through From:  State of WA Dept of Early Living 40000000026       66,913
Total 93.870        8,447,470
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-62-
93.876 Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance in Retail Food Specimens   -   149,753   149,753
93.881 The Health Insurance Enforcement and Consumer Protections Grant Program   -   15,358   15,358
93.889 National Bioterrorism Hospital Preparedness Program   838,654    1,911,273    2,749,927
93.898 Cancer Prevention and Control Programs for State, Territorial and Tribal Organizations   60,717    2,447,440    2,508,157
93.917 HIV Care Formula Grants    1   -    1
93.940 HIV Prevention Activities Health Department Based   848,261    1,539,895    2,388,156
93.944 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/Acquired Immunodeficiency Virus Syndrome
(AIDS) Surveillance    1,003,680   164,482    1,168,162
93.945 Assistance Programs for Chronic Disease Prevention and Control   9,756   533,047   542,803
93.946 Cooperative Agreements to Support State-Based Safe Motherhood and Infant Health
Initiative Programs   -   296,060   296,060
93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services    6,009,601   973,980    6,983,581
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse    19,373,348    1,124,706    20,498,054
93.977 Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Prevention and Control Grants   10,157   856,656   866,813
93.981 Improving Student Health and Academic Achievement through Nutrition, Physical
Activity and the Management of Chronic Conditions in Schools   66,644   239,795   306,439
93.994 Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant to the States    3,031,526    2,954,101    5,985,627
Aging Cluster
93.044 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part B, Grants for Supportive Services and
Senior Centers  $  5,078,489  $ 487,469  $  5,565,958
93.045 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part C, Nutrition Services    9,458,975   710,838    10,169,813
93.053 Nutrition Services Incentive Program    1,822,145   20,314    1,842,459
Total Aging Cluster  $  16,359,609  $  1,218,621  $  17,578,230
TANF Cluster
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families  $ 480,663  $  134,152,077  $  134,632,740
Total TANF Cluster  $ 480,663  $  134,152,077  $  134,632,740
CCDF Cluster
93.575 Child Care and Development Block Grant  $  (3,655,145) $  43,175,973  $  39,520,828
93.596 Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds of the Child Care and Development Fund    13,253,347    39,284,896    52,538,243
Total CCDF Cluster  $  9,598,202  $  82,460,869  $  92,059,071
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
-63-
Medicaid Cluster
93.775 State Medicaid Fraud Control Units  $ -  $  2,273,480  $  2,273,480
93.777 State Survey and Certification of Health Care Providers and Suppliers (Title XVIII)
Medicare   -    4,049,760    4,049,760
93.778 ARRA - Medical Assistance Program   -    22,400,631    22,400,631
93.778 Medical Assistance Program   -   7,592,910,209   7,592,910,209
Total Medicaid Cluster  $ -  $ 7,621,634,080  $ 7,621,634,080
Total Department of Health and Human Services  $  150,112,821  $ 8,480,573,453  $ 8,630,686,274
Corporation For National and Community Service
94.003 State Commissions  $ 17,663  $ 142,009  $ 159,672
94.006 AmeriCorps    2,298,205   -    2,298,205
94.009 Training and Technical Assistance   21,250   75,003   96,253
94.013 Volunteers in Service to America   -   -
Pass Through From:  Corp for Ntl & Comm Service 10000000007       78,029
Total 94.013       78,029
Total Corporation For National and Community Service  $  2,337,118  $ 295,041  $  2,632,159
Office of National Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of 2006
95.001 High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program  $ -  $  3,275,501  $  3,275,501
Total Office of National Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of 2006  $ -  $  3,275,501  $  3,275,501
Social Security Administration
96.008 Social Security - Work Incentives Planning and Assistance Program  $ -  $ 39,760  $ 39,760
Disability Insurance/SSI Cluster
96.001 Social Security Disability Insurance  $ -  $  27,625,448  $  27,625,448
Total Disability Insurance/SSI Cluster  $ -  $  27,625,448  $  27,625,448
Total Social Security Administration  $ -  $  27,665,208  $  27,665,208
Department of Homeland Security
97.008 Non-Profit Security Program  $ 11,317  $ -  $ 11,317
97.012 Boating Safety Financial Assistance    1,724,201   74,986    1,799,187
97.023 Community Assistance Program State Support Services Element (CAP-SSSE)   -   261,323   261,323
97.029 Flood Mitigation Assistance   291,660   4,299   295,959
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019 (continued)
Federal Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor                                                 Pass-Through           Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
CFDA Number                                                Program or Cluster Title                                                         Identifying Number       to Subrecipients  Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
-64-
97.036 Disaster Grants - Public Assistance (Presidentially Declared Disasters)    4,723,078   314,335    5,037,413
97.039 Hazard Mitigation Grant   799,003   161,773   960,776
97.041 National Dam Safety Program   -   88,091   88,091
97.042 Emergency Management Performance Grants    4,080,006   729,265    4,809,271
97.043 State Fire Training Systems Grants   -   20,000   20,000
97.044 Assistance to Firefighters Grant   -   469,566   469,566
97.045 Cooperating Technical Partners   2,686   704,223   706,909
97.046 Fire Management Assistance Grant   -    27,649,232    27,649,232
97.047 Pre-Disaster Mitigation   463,438   180,706   644,144
97.067 Homeland Security Grant Program    3,818,774    1,568,141    5,386,915
97.082 Earthquake Consortium   -   31,072   31,072
Total Department of Homeland Security  $  15,914,163  $  32,257,012  $  48,171,175
Total Expenditures of Federal Awards  $  964,109,878  $ 11,060,310,749  $ 12,024,420,627
-65-
-66-
Notes to the Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards includes the federal grant activity of the State of
Oregon and is presented using the bases of accounting of the originating funds. These include both the modified
accrual and accrual basis of accounting. The information in the schedule is presented in accordance with the
requirements of Title 2 CFR Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). Therefore, some amounts presented in the schedule may
differ from the amounts presented in, or used in the preparation of, the basic financial statements.
The financial statements of the State of Oregon include all fund types for all agencies, boards, commissions, and
courts that are legally part of the State's primary government and its component units. The Oregon Health and
Science University (OHSU), University of Oregon (UO), Oregon State University (OSU), Portland State University
(PSU), Eastern Oregon University (EOU), Oregon Institute of Technology (OIT), Southern Oregon University
(SOU) and Western Oregon University (WOU) are legally separate component units. For the year ended June 30,
2019, these component units have issued separate financial statements and have obtained a separate single
audit as outlined in §200.514 of Uniform Guidance. Therefore, the accompanying schedule does not include the
federal grant activity of these component units. A copy of these reports can be obtained from these institutions
as follows:
OHSU, 2525 SW Third Avenue, Suite 245, Portland, Oregon 97201.
UO, PO Box 3237, Eugene, Oregon 97403.
OSU, 100 Kerr Administration Building, Corvallis, Oregon 97331.
PSU, FADM, PO Box 751, Portland, Oregon 97207.
WOU, 345 Monmouth Ave N. Monmouth, Oregon 97361.
SOU, 1250 Siskiyou Blvd, Ashland, Oregon 97520.
EOU, One University Blvd, La Grande, Oregon 97850.
OIT, 3201 Campus Dr, Klamath Falls, Oregon 97601.
Note 2. DeMinimis Cost Rate
The State of Oregon has not elected to use the 10 percent de minimis cost rates as covered in §200.414 "Indirect
(F&A) costs" of Uniform Guidance.
Note 3. Programs Involving Non-Cash Assistance
Federal expenditures reported in the schedule include the following non-cash assistance programs. All values
are either fair market value at the time of receipt or assessed value provided by the federal agency.
CFDA
Number Title Type of Assistance Value
10.555 National School Lunch Program Commodities $15,950,575
10.559 Summer Food Service Program for Children Commodities 24,786
10.565 Commodity Supplemental Food Program Commodities 512,834
10.569 Emergency Food Assistance Program  Commodities 15,564,317
39.003 Donation of Federal Surplus Personal Property Donated Federal Surplus 3,898,706
93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements Vaccines 47,626,179
Total $83,577,397
State of Oregon
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2019
-67-
Note 4. Unemployment Insurance
State unemployment tax revenues and the other governmental, tribal and non-profit reimbursements in lieu of
State taxes are deposited into the Unemployment Trust Fund in the U.S. Treasury. These funds may only be used
to pay benefits under federally approved State unemployment law.
State unemployment insurance funds are included with federal funds in the total expenditures for CFDA 17.225
(Unemployment Insurance Program). Of the $560,588,526.70 reported as expenditures for the Unemployment
Insurance program, $492,315,630.21 represented expenditures of State funds held in the Unemployment Trust
Fund.
Note 5. Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) Grant (CFDA 11.307)
The Expenditures for the Revolving Loan Fund (RLF) Grant (CFDA 11.307) made during the year ended June 30,
2019, are calculated as follows:
1) Balance of RLF loans outstanding at the end of the fiscal year                                   $8,316,869
2) Cash and investment balance in the RLF at the end of fiscal year                                               3,111,664
3) Administrative expenses paid out of RLF income during the recipient's fiscal year                  27,694
4) The unpaid principal of all loans written off during the fiscal year                                                            0
Total                                                                                                                                                          $11,456,227
5) The Federal Share of RLF (2,000,000/2,667,000)                                                                                     75%
6) Federal Awards Expended during the fiscal year                                                                          $8,592,170
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-68-
Prior Year Financial Statement Findings
This section includes the current status reported by the department of all financial audit findings
from fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. It also includes the current status reported by the department
of all financial audit findings from fiscal year ended June 30, 2017 that were uncorrected at June 30,
2018.
Finding 2018-001:  Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Implement Appropriate Year-End Methodologies
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Management ensure year-end reporting methodologies reflect a complete
understanding of transaction relationships as well as proper application of
amounts provided by other entities.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-002:  Oregon Health Authority
Improve Controls for Monitoring MMIS Claims Edits and Audits
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Management implement monitoring processes to provide assurance over the
accuracy of the MMIS claims edits and audits, as well as implement processes
to understand the edits and audits controls and test their effectiveness and
completeness. Additionally, management should continue to work with their
service provider to maintain a comprehensive inventory of current MMIS
edits and audits.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The claims edit and audit testing plan was reviewed internally and approved
by both the MMIS Business Support Unit and the Office of Financial Services.
The plan was put into effect on April 1, 2019 and two quarterly deliverables
have been provided to demonstrate the testing that has occurred so far in
2019. The MMIS Claims Edits and Audits testing is being conducted by the
MMIS contractor, DXC.
Additionally, an MMIS Claims Edits and Audits Monitoring plan was
developed and implemented on November 1, 2019. The monitoring plan
involves the following approaches:
 Utilize the weekly Flush Claims report
 Work with the Claims analysts in MMIS BSU to identify areas that need to
be monitored
 Monitor new edits and audits to be certain they are functioning properly
 Research and monitor edits and audits when Provider Services identifies
a provider whose claims are denying
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-69-
 Research and monitor edits and audits when the HSD Claims unit
identifies any anomaly with a claim edit issue
 Work with the MMIS BSU Financial team to do research on an edit they
see as inconsistent with what they would normally see when fixing
flushed claims
 Monitor edits and audits around issues identified by the Program
Integrity Unit in OHA
 Monitor claims identified during the bi-weekly interaction with DXC
 Pulling of random edits and audits from the comprehensive list
 Monitor edits and audits through the MMIS User Acceptance Testing site
when claims changes are being tested for promotion to the Production
site
This activity will be conducted by the MMIS Business Support Unit. A
quarterly deliverable will also be completed to represent this activity as well.
Two quarterly deliverables are being produced. One for testing activities and
one for monitoring activities.
OHA maintains a comprehensive inventory of current MMIS edits and audits,
electronically. Both the Medicaid Policy Unit and the MMIS Business Support
Unit maintain a current list. The revised and updated list is provided
quarterly by the MMIS contractor, DXC.
All new edits for MMIS are first tested and validated through the MMIS User
Acceptance Testing site. They are tested by three different groups:  DXC,
MMIS BSU and an analyst from the Medicaid Policy team in Health Systems
Division. Once all three have validated the accuracy of the edit or audit is
correct, the change is promoted to the MMIS Production site. Those new edits
and audits are then part of the ongoing monitoring plan.
Finding 2018-003:  Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Review Controls for Contracts Recorded in Subsidiary
System
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Management strengthen the review of contracts to ensure the correct
funding sources are included and that contracts and the subsidiary system
agree.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The Contracts Unit of HSD is responsible for contracting the majority of the
Behavioral Health Services. These services are identified by service element
name and number; each service element describes a specific mental health or
substance use disorder services to be provided. The funding associated with
each service element is found in a contract’s financial pages. All funding is
classified under one of four primary sources:  general funds, federal funds,
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-70-
other funds, and lottery funds. However, the financial pages provide line-item
detail that includes the name and number of the fund, corresponding to the
revenue source, from which payments are to be made. The Contracts Unit
enters the detailed financial information for each contract into R*BASE, a
financial system also used by Office of Financial Services (OFS) for contract
payments.
The Contracts Unit was notified of the audit finding regarding a discrepancy
between the fund name and number identified in a contract’s financial pages
and the actual fund name and number from which OFS made payment. We
discovered that the language in the County Financial Assistance Agreements
(CFAA) limited payment by OFS to the specific fund identified in the financial
pages. The intent is to adhere to the funds and funding sources listed but
there are times when funding is insufficient—a frequent occurrence—to
cover payments due. Therefore, to make the payments, the Contracts Unit
had to issue an amendment just to change the fund number so OFS could
make the payment.
After meeting with OFS, it was agreed that transferring between funds within
the same primary category (GF, FF, OF, LF) would allow OFS to meet its
statutory requirement for prompt contractor payments when revenue was
insufficient under another fund number. This would also eliminate the need
to issue frequent amendments for simple administrative fund movements. It
also reduced the cost to the contractor as a result of fewer amendments
being required. The corrective action taken was to modify the terms in the
CFAA, by adding a short disclaimer at the end of the fund number listing in
the “Explanation of Financial Pages” exhibit.
During this process, an error was discovered in the “Explanation of Financial
Pages” exhibit, errantly identifying fund “888 Gambling Treatment” as
general funds. The correct identification should have been lottery funds. That
was corrected, along with the language change mentioned above. The CFAA
was amended once both issues were addressed.
HSD has taken steps to ensure the finding is fully remediated and
implemented for the 2019-2021 contract cycle; however, we were unable
given the timeline and impact to amend all 2017-2019 cycle contracts
impacted by this finding.
Finding 2018-004:  Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Controls over Cost Recoveries
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management implement procedures to gain an understanding of
controls over transactions processed by service organizations and follow
established procedures to ensure all revenue due to the department is
received.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-71-
Agency response:  By implementing the items below the Program can more easily monitor
claims activity and follow up quickly with our Pharmacy Benefit Manager
(PBM) and contract pharmacies relating to contract compliance, when
necessary. We include this analysis in our bi-weekly operational meetings
with the PBM and it is reviewed at our monthly 340B Oversight Committee
and Financial Review meetings. We can be confident that the revenue
numbers reporting on both federal grant and state fiscal year reports are
reconciled to SFMA and to the PBM’s external accounting system as well.
 Developing and updating policies and procedure documents pertaining to
the collection, process and summarization and analysis of program
income
Department management immediately implemented procedures for the
receipt and reconciliation of pharmaceutical cost recoveries, known as
“Program Income for Insurance Claims Reimbursements Revenue” (AOBJ
2653). Policy documents to formalize the newly refined processes are
under review awaiting final approval.
 Creating an accounts receivable (AR) model in Excel to track amounts
owed to the Program by the seven contract pharmacies for insurance
claim reimbursements
The Program audited all program income transactions, both billing and
payments, back to July 1, 2015. An excel tracking sheet was created to
download and record contract pharmacy accounts receivable invoices
directly from the Program’s Pharmacy Benefits Manager’s (PBM)
database. Payment tracking is included on the accounts receivable
tracking sheet to ensure reconciliation to PBM’s portal as well as to OFS
daily cash reports received from the state’s receipting office in Salem.
Enhancements to the tracking sheet were added to expand reporting
periods for both federal and state fiscal years. This allows the Program to
track amounts carried forward from year to year, as well as to generate
predictives for budgeting and program income activity. This information
supported requests for limitations reporting, and the Legislative Fiscal
Officer to understand and learn about our program’s activities. These
predictives are actively used by program management to better
understand and detect changes in program income activities by the PBM,
acting as fiscal intermediary, as well as contract pharmacy transactions
claims activity in general.
 Downloading all invoiced claims into a secured portal to add to the AR
model
Program income insurance claims reimbursement invoices are generated
by the PBM’s accounting system and posted to their secure portal semi-
monthly. The Program downloads the information and imports these
directly into the program income/accounts receivable tracking sheet in
excel format on the 1st and 16th of each month. The new entries are
compared to the prior download to observe all changes to the PBM Portal
since the last download.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-72-
 Evaluating amounts due from each PBM on a biweekly basis and
following up using collection procedures for any that are past due
Program management reviews our program income’s accounts receivable
position and contract pharmacies’ contract performance on a monthly
basis at our 340B compliance committee meeting and follows up with
contractors accordingly. At our request, our PBM is also including an
accounts receivable summary semi-monthly to show the outstanding
(unpaid) invoices currently owed to the program.
 Posting payments daily into the AR mode
Daily, the Program posts cash receipts sent by the PBM, who directly
receives contract pharmacies’ insurance claim reimbursement billings
payments as part of their fiscal intermediary services provided for in
their contract. Each month, these cash receipts are recorded and
compared to both the OFS Receipting Unit’s monthly cash receipt report
for both amount and AOBJ coding and then reconciled to SFMA
accounting system.
 Evaluating, reconciling and summarizing revenue to determine budget
versus actual on a weekly basis
Program income invoices are recorded and summarized on a biweekly
basis when PBM generates contract pharmacy billings. Payments are
applied to the specific invoice numbers as they are received by the
Program on a daily basis. Reports are generated from the excel model and
reviewed by program management and the 340 Monitoring Committee.
Contract pharmacy performance is discussed, including billing and
payment practices.
Finding 2018-005:  Department of Administrative Services
Buildings' Estimated Useful Lives Not Reviewed in Accordance with
Policy
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   The Planning and Construction Management program review the useful lives
of buildings and building improvements in accordance with department
policy.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  In March 2019, DAS Enterprise Asset Management revised policy 107-03-160
and abolished policies 107- 03-140 and 107-03-150. As such and as noted in
your recommendation, the revised policy dictates DAS shall, every four years
by December of an odd-numbered year in which a legislative session takes
place, reassess the useful life of all portfolio assets that are at least 75%
depreciated.
This action is scheduled to take place in the course of DAS' biennial capital
planning which begins October 2019.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-73-
Finding 2018-006:  Oregon Business Development Department
Continue to Improve Investment Financial Reporting Controls
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Management
 Ensure its review of each investment fund valuation, for financial
reporting purposes, is timely completed and sufficiently documented.
 Correct the errors identified in the accounting system and all errors in
the department’s tracking spreadsheets and set it up so the department
can accurately track each investment’s commitment, investment cost and
distributions.
 Establish policy and procedures to accurately track each investment’s
commitment, investment cost and distribution and that enables staff to
correctly record the various investment-related transactions.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Ensure its review of each investment fund valuation, for financial reporting
purposes, is timely completed and sufficiently documented.
 This process is effectively created and is being completed by OBDD staff;
however, it is not a process that is being completed timely. It is our goal
to complete this documentation in a timely manner.
Correct the errors identified in the accounting system and all errors in the
department’s tracking spreadsheets and set it up so the department can
accurately track each investment’s commitment, investment cost and
distributions.
 The department has made many improvements in the tracking and
accuracy of tracking each investment. The majority of the prior fiscal
years accounting errors have been corrected and the department will
work toward complete accuracy of all investments separately recorded in
SFMA to make tracking much easier.
Establish policy and procedures to accurately track each investment’s
commitment, investment cost and distribution and that enables staff to
correctly record the various investment-related transactions.
 These policies and procedures have been completely established. The
department is working toward accurately and timely following those
policies and procedures as written.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-74-
Finding 2018-007:  Oregon Business Development Department
Improve Year End Accrual Process
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management implement adequate processes that ensure year-
end accruals for expenditures are properly and timely recorded in the
accounting records.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-001:  Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Review Procedures
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Management ensure the transaction review process includes examination of
proper coding and accounting periods.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The procedures that affected the fiscal year 2017 audit were updated and
were sufficient to control the errors present in the fiscal year 2017 audit.
However, another error surfaced in the fiscal year 2018 audit, necessitating
an update to the procedure.
Finding 2017-002:  Department of Revenue
Improve Year-End Financial Procedures to Ensure Interfund
Transactions are Balanced
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management develop year-end accrual procedures to help
ensure accurate and complete year-end financial reporting, which includes
ensuring all interfund transactions are balanced.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-003:  Department of Revenue
Perform and Review Key Cash Reconciliations on a Regular and
Timely Basis
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure all key cash reconciliations are completed
consistently and timely and are separately reviewed and approved.
Status:    Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Continue to update performance tracking spreadsheet.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-75-
Continue to focus on reconciliation completion by accounting manager
through monthly review of performance tracking spreadsheet. Clearly assign
and identify preparers and reviewers for each reconciliation and holding the
team accountable.
Partnered with Revenue’s internal audit staff for process efficiencies,
updating procedures and creating stronger review policies.
All vacant positions have been filled. Preparers and reviewers have and will
continue to receive GenTax and SFMS training to ensure that reconciliation
are complete and correct, due to the dynamic nature of the systems.
Continue to work with the Information Technology Services Division to
complete the numerous GenTax system change requests that are still
outstanding. Many of these requests would establish or correct an automated
process that could improve the efficiency and effectiveness of what is
primarily a manual and time-consuming methodology on the Finance end.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2020.
Finding 2017-004:  Department of Revenue
Strengthen Controls over System Access
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure system access be thoroughly reviewed for
employees changing positions within the department and system access
rights be timely updated.
Status:    Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Within the Financial Services Division, Finance managers will continue to
review and enforce the use of a separation checklist to ensure all access is
appropriately and timely terminated. They will continue to retain copy of
termination request in employee file. They will also continue to review
quarterly all access involved with finance duties and update as necessary.
Human Resources (HR) will continue its efforts to assist managers through
the separation/termination process in 2019. HR will develop a process to
track receipt of the (employee signed) termination checklist by updating the
form and procedures for when an employee leaves the agency. Additionally,
when a manager submits a termination within Workday, there is a to-do task
to remind the managers about completing the termination checklist. HR
implemented some internal controls by partnering with the RCA coordinator
to supply a monthly employee termination report, this report will be used to
validate the timeliness of the request to terminate an employee’s access upon
separation.
DOR has a procedure that instructs managers to request removal of access
for terminated or transferred employees. DOR has since developed a draft
procedure for requesting access removal for transferred employees. The
procedure improves the prior practice by specifying that previous access will
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-76-
be removed upon request for new access. DOR also has implemented a
compensating control; a monthly comparison of terminated employees to a
list of access requests to ensure managers have requested access be
terminated.
DOR has developed draft language to update policies and procedures so that
periodic manager review of access is required but has not formally approved
the changes. DOR is developing an automated solution for conducting and
documenting manager reviews. This action should help ensure periodic
review is performed and documented.
Anticipated Completion Date:  September 1, 2019.
Finding 2017-005:  Oregon Military Department
Strengthen Financial Reporting over Federal Revenues
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure reporting of federal revenues and
expenditures, including year-end accruals, is accurate, timely, and in the
appropriate fund. We also recommend that management ensure accounting
records and documentation contain sufficient detail to support the
transactions recorded in the accounting system.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-009:  Oregon Liquor Control Commission
Strengthen Controls over System Access
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure access to its applications be reviewed
regularly to confirm that employees have only the access they require for
their jobs. We also recommend management ensure activity of users with
excessive access be reviewed periodically.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  OLCC has assigned an Information Services Specialist 6, Information Systems
Analyst, to review, monthly, access to the following OLCC systems:  Agent
Revenue Management, Daily Sales, Merchandising Business, Non-Budget
Vouchers, and Oregon Liquor Agent Services. The first review was performed
on June 20, 2018, however documented monthly reviews did not begin until
January 2019. Results of the monitoring are communicated to the Assistant
Director of Financial Services.
OLCC created and adopted a policy formalizing the IT access review process
in July 2019 to improve the controls per OAR 10.60.00.PO.101. System access
for all employees will be reviewed quarterly by the division managers to
ensure that their system access is appropriate.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-77-
OLCC's Information Services Specialist 6, Information Systems Analyst will
monitor the frequency of logins on the systems for users with read/write
access monthly and send the results monthly to the Assistant Director of
Financial Services over Disbursements for review. There is no method
currently available to the OLCC systems to track specific activity in these
systems but the ISS6 can determine the frequency of logins.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-78-
Prior Year Federal Award Findings and Questioned Costs
This section includes the current status reported by the department of all federal audit findings
from fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. It also includes the current status reported by the
department of all federal audit findings from fiscal year ended June 30, 2017 that were
uncorrected at June 30, 2018.
Finding 2018-008: Department of Human Services
Improve Accuracy of Performance Data Reports
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Reporting
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2010
Recommendation: Department management implement processes and procedures to ensure
data reports accurately reflect case status and activity of the reporting
period.
Status: No corrective action taken.
Agency response:  System changes will not be implemented in the current Legacy system, it
was determined the scope of work necessary to correct business
requirements was too great given the Legacy system is phasing out.
Legacy system will start phasing out with Oregon’s new eligibility system,
ONE, rolling out starting May 2020. Full implementation is scheduled to
be completed by end of calendar year 2020.
The department has been in communication with our federal contact to
discuss the accuracy of the federal report and the changes to Oregon’s
eligibility system. The department will continue technical assistance with
the appropriate contacts at Federal Administration for Children and
Families. This process will ensure the department has a clear
understanding of the instructions for each federal field and write change
requests to correct business requirements as necessary.
Finding 2018-009: Department of Human Services
Failure to Conduct Re-determinations Results in Questioned
Costs
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $190,800 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management implement monitoring of eligibility re-
determinations to ensure they are completed timely. We also recommend
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-79-
department management correct the identified cases and reimburse the
federal agency for amounts claimed for ineligible cases.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-010: Department of Human Services
Emergency Assistance Costs Exceed Limits
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $141,217 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management ensure timely and consistent monitoring of OR-
Kids reports, including adequate communication, to ensure the cases
exceeding the benefit threshold of $25,350 are corrected timely. We also
recommend department management reimburse the federal agency for
costs exceeding the limit.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-011: Department of Human Services
Assistance Provided Beyond Federal Time Limit
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $953 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management ensure adequate processes are in place to
ensure federal TANF payments are not made beyond the 60 month time
limit. We also recommend department management correct the identified
case and reimburse the federal agency for amounts claimed.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-012: Department of Human Services
Seek Approval for Federal Five-Year Time Limit Exemptions
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Eligibility
Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2013
Recommendation: Department management continue to work with DHHS to obtain
approval of the department’s plan for “Indian country” time limit
exemptions. We also recommend department management correct cases
that had been improperly exempted prior to January 1, 2017, and review
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-80-
and reimburse the federal agency as appropriate for payments made
beyond the allowable time limit.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-013: Oregon Health Authority
Improve Controls for Monitoring MMIS Claims Edits and Audits
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed, Special Tests and Provisions
Material Weakness
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Management implement monitoring processes to provide assurance over
the accuracy of MMIS claims edits and audits, as well as implement
processes to understand the edits and audits controls and test their
effectiveness and completeness. Additionally, management should
continue to work with their service provider to maintain a
comprehensive inventory of current MMIS edits and audits.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The claims edit and audit testing plan was reviewed internally and
approved by both the MMIS Business Support Unit and the Office of
Financial Services. The plan was put into effect on April 1, 2019 and two
quarterly deliverables have been provided to demonstrate the testing
that has occurred so far in 2019. The MMIS Claims Edits and Audits
testing is being conducted by the MMIS contractor, DXC.
Additionally, an MMIS Claims Edits and Audits Monitoring plan was
developed and implemented on November 1, 2019. The monitoring plan
involves the following approaches:
 Utilize the weekly Flush Claims report
 Work with the Claims analysts in MMIS BSU to identify areas that
need to be monitored
 Monitor new edits and audits to be certain they are functioning
properly
 Research and monitor edits and audits when Provider Services
identifies a provider whose claims are denying
 Research and monitor edits and audits when the HSD Claims unit
identifies any anomaly with a claim edit issue
 Work with the MMIS BSU Financial team to do research on an edit
they see as inconsistent with what they would normally see when
fixing flushed claims
 Monitor edits and audits around issues identified by the Program
Integrity Unit in OHA
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-81-
 Monitor claims identified during the bi-weekly interaction with DXC
 Pulling of random edits and audits from the comprehensive list
 Monitor edits and audits through the MMIS User Acceptance Testing
site when claims changes are being tested for promotion to the
Production site
This activity will be conducted by the MMIS Business Support Unit. A
quarterly deliverable will also be completed to represent this activity as
well.
Two quarterly deliverables are being produced. One for testing activities
and one for monitoring activities.
OHA maintains a comprehensive inventory of current MMIS edits and
audits, electronically. Both the Medicaid Policy Unit and the MMIS
Business Support Unit maintain a current list. The revised and updated
list is provided quarterly by the MMIS contractor, DXC.
All new edits for MMIS are first tested and validated through the MMIS
User Acceptance Testing site. They are tested by three different groups:
DXC, MMIS BSU and an analyst from the Medicaid Policy team in Health
Systems Division. Once all three have validated the accuracy of the edit or
audit is correct, the change is promoted to the MMIS Production site.
Those new edits and audits are then part of the ongoing monitoring plan.
Finding 2018-014: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Income Not Always Verified by System
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Eligibility
Material Weakness
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management investigate and identify the extent to which
client income was not verified. We also recommend department
management provide appropriate notification and training to staff to
ensure that data is entered in a manner that would ensure the ONE
system appropriately accesses the hub to verify income eligibility.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-82-
Finding 2018-015: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve Documentation for Client Eligibility Determinations
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles, Eligibility, Matching
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $54,164 (known)
Initial Year:   2010
Recommendation: Management strengthen controls to perform timely eligibility
redeterminations and verification of client income, and ensure eligible
clients are appropriately enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid.
Additionally, we recommend management provide periodic training to
caseworkers to reduce the risk of administrative errors. We also
recommend management correct all identified issues and reimburse the
federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  As of December 26, 2018, the department's Asset Verification Services
system is providing electronic verification of assets, including bank
accounts and balance information for non-assumed eligible Medicaid
individuals subject to resource limits and/or look back periods at initial
determination and redetermination, and for assumed eligible OSIPM
individuals at initial determination when Medicaid Long-Term Care
Services and Supports are requested. Medicaid redetermination reports
are being made available to local office leadership to ensure
redeterminations are completed timely. DHS is working with the Oregon
Health Authority to ensure timely transition of Medicaid benefits for new
Medicare recipients.
Current financial eligibility training is being restructured to allow for
fundamentals training prior to system and policy training. This change
will be effective July 2019. Integrated ONE-related training is in
development and is on schedule for delivery prior to Pilot.
An adjustment was processed for $119 federal funds ($126.07 total
funds) with BTMCEOZL on May 25, 2019 and reported on CMS-64 in the
third quarter of Federal Fiscal Year 2019.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-83-
Finding 2018-016: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve Documentation for Provider Eligibility Determinations and
Provider Revalidations
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $8,518 (known)
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Department and authority management strengthen controls to ensure
documentation supporting a provider’s eligibility determination is
retained. We also recommend department management reimburse the
federal agency for cost paid related to the ineligible provider.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The original database check was completed in April 2019 and staff
completed a full set of database checks for all providers where there was
no documented database check/validation.  We will be pulling another
data pull in late July and complete a full set of database
checks/validations for providers where there is no documented database
check/validation. We are actively seeking ways to automate the process
to eliminate errors. In addition, we are working to obtain audit finding
detail in order to reimburse the federal awarding agency for known
questioned costs.
Finding 2018-017: Department of Human Services
Improve Foster Care Eligibility and Licensing Documentation
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $17,972 (known); $817,648 (likely)
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Department management ensure all required documentation is
completed timely, reviewed, and maintained. We also recommend
department management reimburse the federal agency for costs paid
related to the exceptions identified above.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-84-
Finding 2018-018: Department of Human Services
Financial Transaction Processing Errors in Child Welfare System
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Medicaid Cluster (93.775, 93.777, 93.778)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $277,004 (Foster Care known), $5,949 (Medicaid
known)
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Department management review OR-Kids transaction processing and
complete system modifications as appropriate to ensure proper financial
reporting of program expenditures. We also recommend department
management review prior year and current year transactions and
reimburse the federal agency for grant expenditures claimed
inappropriately.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  A portion of this audit finding was mitigated by OR-Kids JIRA# 25911 -
System not allowing placement corrections on service types with age
bracketed services. This system correction will now calculate the
Placement Begin Date against the participant’s DOB, allowing retroactive
placement corrections for all age bracketed service types. This change
was put into production in Build 3.7.1.0 – Maintenance Release 9, on
January 23, 2019.
A report has also been developed to identify adjustments that impact a
state grant rather than the federal grant and is in the final validation
stage. Once the report is validated, the report will be used to accurately
report federal expenditures. The new report will be used for the
reporting period ending June 30, 2020.
For IV-E, an adjustment was made with document BT183513, and
$277,004 was repaid and reported on the 9/30/19 CB-496. For Medicaid,
an adjustment was made with document BT186519 on 02/10/20, and
$5,949 was repaid and entered into the CMS for FFY20Q2.
Finding 2018-019: Department of Human Services
Strengthen Review over Costs Charged to Program
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles, Matching
Significant Deficiency
Questioned Costs: $116 (known)
Initial Year:   2015
Recommendation: Department management ensure payments are adequately reviewed to
verify payments are for the correct federal financial participation rate
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-85-
and calculated correctly. We also recommend department management
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Additional unallowable expenditures were identified and repaid to the
federal awarding agency. Unallowable expenditures of $338 was shown
as decreasing line 219 on the March 31, 2019 CB-496 report for the ergo
assessments.
The Juvenile Justice invoice for $2.66 was entered March 9, 2020 using
BT187182 and will appear on the March 31, 2020 report. The mileage
adjustment of $0.71 is expected to also appear on the March 31, 2020
report.
FPR reviewed past findings and SOS-15-011 is consistent with SOS-18-
019. The OR-Kids team reviewed the transactions in the findings and
identified a systemic issue that was updated in 2017. FPR and the OR-
Kids team worked to implement an update to OR-Kids in 2018 to
automatically calculate the mileage reimbursement rate using the current
rate. A transmittal was sent to the field, effective 7/1/2018, but was
subsequently rescinded after it was discovered that the OR-Kids database
cannot accept a three-decimal reimbursement amount. The OR-Kids team
continues to work on changes to the database to resolve this finding. The
most recent update from the OR-Kids team was on 1/28/2020 in which
they said that automatic rate calculation is on the list for an upcoming
maintenance release over the next several weeks. The current estimated
implementation date is 3/31/2020. While waiting for this change to go
into effect, Child Welfare continues to use a workaround process by
sending out a transmittal at the beginning of each year with the newest
mileage rate information and conducting spot checks for accuracy. The
current mileage transmittal, CW-IM-20-001, went out to all of Child
Welfare in January 2020.
Finding 2018-020: Department of Human Services
Improve Contract Monitoring
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed, Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2017
Recommendation: Department management ensure adequate contract monitoring
processes are in place to provide assurance that the department is
receiving the services provided for in these waiver based contracts.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  These findings are connected to the use of Title IV-E federal funds. For
these specific services and contracts, the IV-E funds were only allowed
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-86-
under the Title IV-E waiver, which ended September 30, 2019. Therefore,
there are no longer concerns about inappropriate federal fund claiming
because these contracts are only using the General fund. No new
contracts were entered into during State fiscal year 2019 that would use
Title IV-E funds.
Finding 2018-021: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Controls over Changes to Cost Allocation Plans
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP) Cluster
(10.551, 10.561)
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Management ensure changes to the cost allocation process are included
in its change log to ensure all changes are incorporated in subsequent
plan submissions. Further, the department should ensure the
discrepancies identified are corrected in the next plan submission.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Going forward, we are documenting all of our correspondence in a log
with a number, brief description and which plan year it applies to.
Additionally, with each update requested, the plans are being produced in
their entirety where each version builds on the prior so that the most
recent plan or update is always the most current and inclusive of all
changes and or updates. Regarding the Random Moment Sampling, the
majority of those activity codes required narrative updates only to ensure
the description of the calculation was accurate.
There were two activity codes that resulted in claiming differences:
 Activity Code 4.A.8 – Pre-Finalized Adoption Assistance Case
Management – The penetration rate used in activity code 4.A.8 is
based on IV-E Foster Care. This rate should have instead been based
on IV-Adoptions. The funding source charged for this activity,
however, was in fact “TITLE IV-E ADOPTION ASSISTANCE”. Because
the federal funding source is correct, there is no adverse impact to
reporting. Because the Foster Care penetration rate is lower
(57.07%) than the Adoptions rate (86.24%), the resulting impact on
claiming is that Oregon under-claimed to IV-E. Since the amount that
is not funded by IV-E is charged to state funds (GF), as such no
correcting entry is necessary.
 Activity Code 4.A.2 Transportation for Medical, Dental, And Mental
Health Services – The penetration rate used in this activity is XIX
Foster Care (XIX FC) eligible children. The rate should have been XIX
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-87-
weighted / blended (based on Foster Care and In-Home). The
approximate difference in rates is 2.5% less when using a blended
rate. As a result, the agency over-claimed to title XIX. Activity code
4.A.2 accounts for approximately 1.77% of Child Welfare Survey
results. The overall impact to Child Welfare RMSS results is 0.043%
(or a 2.5% XIX reduction in the 1.77% of survey responses in activity
code 4.A.2), the federal fund impact and correcting entry is estimated
at approximately $63k.
The entry for 4.A.2 was made with document numbers BTCC2130
through BTCC2136. Total federal fund impact was $36,204. The initial
estimate was based on averages versus a month by month calculation.
This will be reported on the federal fiscal year 2019 quarter 4, CMS-64
report.
Finding 2018-022: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen Controls over Review of Expenditures
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP) Cluster
(10.551, 10.561)
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $2,219 (known); $168,875 (likely)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Management strengthen internal controls to ensure all costs entering the
cost pools are allowed and for the correct amount. Further, the
department should identify any additional mileage rate errors and
correct all known issues.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-023: Department of Justice
Ensure Allowable Costs are Supported
Child Support Enforcement (CFDA 93.563)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles, Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $25,689 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management ensure subrecipient reimbursement requests
contain sufficient supporting documentation and that unusual amounts
be investigated for accuracy. We also recommend the department
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-88-
Finding 2018-024: Department of Justice
Improve Controls over Federal Financial Reporting
Child Support Enforcement (CFDA 93.563)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management strengthen internal controls to ensure OCSE-
396 reports contain actual and verifiable transactions supported by
readily available accounting records.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-025: Department of Human Services
Improve Controls over EBT Card Inventory
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Cluster (10.551,
10.561)
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2013
Recommendation: Department management implement a consistent process to verify
branch offices are conducting required inventory and accurately
completing stock control logs.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-026: Department of Education
Strengthen Tracking Controls over Matching Requirements
Child Nutrition Cluster (10.553, 10.555, 10.556, 10.559)
Matching
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management strengthen its controls over the matching
requirement to ensure consistent monitoring activities occur.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  ODE developed a master list to track school districts with a matching
requirement. Procedures were updated to include specific due dates for
documentation submissions, follow-up notifications and consequences
for non­compliance.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-89-
Finding 2018-027: Department of Education
Strengthen Monitoring Controls over Subrecipients
Child Nutrition Cluster (10.553, 10.555, 10.556, 10.559)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management implement procedures to ensure monitoring
checklists are fully completed.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-028: Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Ensure Timely Submission of Cost Allocation Plan
WIA/WIOA Adult Program (17.258)
WIA/WIOA Youth Activities (17.259)
WIA/WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grants (17.278)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $1,346,380 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management ensure a plan or rate is submitted to the
federal government within six months after the end of the fiscal year.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  HECC has contracted with FCS Group, a company with a proven track
record of developing approved cost allocation models for other Oregon
state agencies, to develop its 2016, 2017 and 2018 cost allocation plans.
The plan will include descriptions of the methodology, approach and
assumptions, cost pools, related allocation factors, exclusions, and
resulting allocations and rates used. FCS will train HECC staff on model
inputs, framework, modeling techniques, and use of the model in general.
Staff will then be able to use the framework to develop and submit
subsequent plans. HECC has informed the US Department of Labor that
this work is currently in progress and expects it to be complete within
the next few months.
When working with the DOL it was determined that, the contractor, FCS,
based calculations on calendar year values, in determining a COST
ALLOCATION model. DOL determined this to be incorrect, the
calculations needed to base on fiscal year values. HECC then re-created a
new model, with DOL guidance, using fiscal year dates, to determine the
newly minted INDIRECT rate for HECC.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-90-
The indirect rate exercise was completed on December 31, 2019. We
completed the exercise with a signed agreement and a Certificate of
Indirect Cost agreement for 2017 and 2018.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2019.
Finding 2018-029: Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Improve Controls over Payroll
WIA/WIOA Adult Program (17.258)
WIA/WIOA Youth Activities (17.259)
WIA/WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grants (17.278)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $46,568 (known)
Initial Year:   2017
Recommendation: Management review all timesheets to ensure employee time is
appropriately coded for program purposes. We also recommend
management reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-030: Department of Environmental Quality
Strengthen Controls over Costs Reclassified to the Federal
Program
Performance Partnership Grants (66.605)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $116,027 (known)
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management improve the process and strengthen control
over costs reclassified to the federal program to ensure duplicate charges
are prevented.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-031: Department of Environmental Quality
Improve Controls over Federal Financial Reporting
Performance Partnership Grants (66.605)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Management work with their federal liaisons to correct the reports, and
implement controls to ensure future reports contain accurate
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-91-
information, follow federal reporting guidelines, and are supported by
accounting records.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  DEQ has coordinated with our Federal Partner (EPA) and has received
guidance on properly reporting 1) agency matching expenditures for the
Federal Financial Report (FFR, SF Form 425), and 2)
agency  procurement amounts for the US EPA MBE/WBE Utilization
Under Federal Grants and Cooperative Agreements Report (EPA Form
5700-52A). Because FFR and MBW/WBE reports for FFY18 were
corrected in SFY20, outside the audit reporting period of SFY19, the
resulting status is Partial Corrective Action Taken.
Finding 2018-032: Department of Education
Implement Eligibility Standard in Subrecipient Maintenance of
Effort Review
Special Education (IDEA) Cluster (84.027; 84.173)
Level of Effort – Maintenance of Effort
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: Unknown
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management implement a process to include the eligibility
standard when reviewing subrecipients’ maintenance of effort to help
ensure compliance with federal regulations.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2018-033: Department of Education
Ensure Subrecipient Monitoring Includes Evaluation of Risk
Special Education (IDEA) Cluster (84.027; 84.173)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management establish effective internal controls to help
ensure that the assessment of each subrecipient’s risk of noncompliance
is performed and adequately documented.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  ODE developed written schedules for short-term and future annual
monitoring. A scheduled monitoring using previously developed tools
was unavoidably delayed due to a district issue. Written report formats
were developed for each type of monitoring. Processes were updated to
include (1) Assistant Superintendent review/approval of all completed
monitoring reports; (2) providing approved reports to districts with
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-92-
timelines for responses; and (3) maintaining documentation of the
monitoring processes.
Finding 2018-034: Department of Education
Ensure Subrecipient Monitoring Includes Federal Fiscal
Requirements
Special Education (IDEA) Cluster (84.027; 84.173)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2014
Recommendation: Department management implement fiscal monitoring processes that
ensure subrecipients have accounting and internal control systems
adequate to administer federal fiscal requirements.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  ODE has begun providing training to staff on the previously developed
monitoring tools. ODE is in the process of scheduling the first three
sample districts to monitor and obtain feedback from regarding the use
of the previously developed tools. Revisions to the monitoring tools will
be dependent on above visits and feedback.
Finding 2018-035: Department of Education
Strengthen Controls and Improve Documentation for Subrecipient
Risk Assessments
Title I Grants to Local Educational Agencies (84.010)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation: Department management develop and implement internal controls to
help ensure that risk assessments of subrecipients for monitoring
purposes are performed and documented.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-93-
Finding 2018-036: Department of Education
Improve Accuracy of Subgrant Reductions for Subrecipients Not
Meeting MOE
Title I Grants to Local Educational Agencies (84.010)
Level of Effort – Maintenance of Effort
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2015
Recommendation: Department management strengthen controls to help ensure
reductions of subgrants to LEAs not meeting MOE are accurate.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-010:  Department of Human Services
Child Welfare Systems Allows Claims Outside Period of Performance
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Period of Performance
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2013
Recommendation: Department management continue to pursue system changes to OR-Kids
to prevent transactions from reimbursing outside the period of
performance. In the meantime, the department should develop a process
to better identify transactions that are appropriate to net and
transactions that should not be netted to ensure adjustments are
reported appropriately.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-011: Department of Human Services
Improve Contract Monitoring
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Material Weakness
Initial Year:   2017
Recommendation: Department management ensure adequate contract monitoring
processes are in place to provide assurance that the department is
receiving the services provided for in these waiver based contracts. We
also recommend department management seek clarification regarding
allocation of equal monthly payments among clients served and verify
that startup costs, camp services, and pre-paid flexible funds are
appropriate waiver expenditures.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  These findings are connected to the use of Title IV-E federal funds. For
these specific services and contracts, the IV-E funds were only allowed
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-94-
under the Title IV-E waiver, which ended September 30, 2019. Therefore,
there are no longer concerns about inappropriate federal fund claiming
because these contracts are only using the General fund. No new
contracts were entered into during State fiscal year 2019 that would use
Title IV-E funds.
Finding 2017-012: Department of Human Services
Improve Foster Care Provider Eligibility Documentation
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $3,487
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Department management ensure all required documentation is
completed timely, reviewed, and maintained, and that eligibility is
determined appropriately. We also recommend department management
reimburse the federal agency for costs paid related to ineligible
providers.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-013: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Financial Transaction Processing Errors in Child Welfare System
Foster Care – Title IV-E (93.658)
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $92,486 (Foster Care); $45,339 (Medicaid)
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Department management review OR-Kids transaction processing and
make system modifications as appropriate to ensure proper financial
reporting of program expenditures. We also recommend department
management review prior year and current year transactions and
reimburse the federal agency for grant expenditures claimed
inappropriately.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-95-
Agency response:  This audit finding was partially mitigated by OR-Kids JIRA# 25911 -
System not allowing placement corrections on service types with age
bracketed services. This system correction will now calculate the
Placement Begin Date against the participant’s DOB, allowing retroactive
placement corrections for all age bracketed service types. This change
was put into production in Build 3.7.1.0 – Maintenance Release 9, on
January 23, 2019.
A report has been developed to identify adjustments that impact a state
grant rather than the federal grant and is in the final validation stage.
Once the report is validated, the report will be used to accurately report
federal expenditures. The new report will be used for the reporting
period ending June 30, 2020.
A change request for a system fix has been written. However, the date for
the system fix is not yet determined.
Questioned costs in this finding were repaid for both Foster Care –
Title IV-E and Medicaid and reported on March 31, 2019 as follows:
Foster Care – Title IV-E costs of $92,487 were repaid on the March 31,
2019 CB-496 report as a correcting adjustment and reported on the
following lines:
 Decreasing line 1 – Total ($21,604)
 Decreasing line 2 – Total ($834)
 Decreasing line 3 – Total ($68,214)
 Decreasing line 4 – Total ($1,835)
Medicaid questioned costs were adjusted on BT178748 and reported
on the March 31, 2019 CMS-64 report in the amount of $45,339.
Finding 2017-014: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Ensure Medicaid Payments are Sufficiently Supported
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Allowable Costs, Eligibility
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $33,928 (CFDA 93.778)
Initial Year:   2010
Recommendation: Management strengthen controls to verify applications exist during client
eligibility redeterminations, perform timely eligibility redeterminations
and verification of client resources, close benefits for clients no longer
eligible, and ensure eligible clients are enrolled in both Medicare and
Medicaid. We also recommend management correct all identified issues
and reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-96-
Finding 2017-015: Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve Documentation for Provider Eligibility Determinations and
Provider Revalidations
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $36,576
Initial Year:   2012
Recommendation: Management strengthen controls to ensure documentation supporting a
provider’s eligibility determination is retained. For current providers
with missing documentation, we recommend the department verify they
are eligible to provide services and obtain the necessary documentation.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The Provider Enrollment Unit has implemented the quarterly data pull
for missed database checks. Initially how the data was pulled from MMIS
and the content of the data caused delays due to the volume and sorting
through the provider file. Those issues are being worked through and as
additional reports are pulled, the process will become more streamlined.
The next data pull is on track and scheduled for July 2019.
Finding 2017-016: Department of Human Services
Improve Controls over Monthly Copay Calculations
Child Care and Development Fund Cluster (CFDA 93.575, CFDA
93.596)
Allowable Costs
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $1,939 (known), $259,126 (likely)
Initial Year:  2014
Recommendation: Department management ensure a client’s monthly copay is correctly
calculated and applications are retained. We also recommend
department management reimburse the federal agency for unallowable
costs.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  On June 21, 2018, DHS completed the reimbursement to the federal
agency for the known questioned costs of $1,939 on document
BT172966.
Child Care Policy reissued a transmittal (SS-IM-18-016) on June 15, 2018
to department field staff as a reminder to reinforce the importance of
increased accuracy in the Employment Related Daycare (ERDC) program.
Quality Assurance in collaboration with Quality Control and Policy
Analysts completed a focused review of ERDC cases the first week of
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-97-
August 2018. Quality Assurance, also in collaboration with the policy
team, published another specific edition of an Accuracy in Action
newsletter focusing on ERDC budgeting and child care hours published
March 2018 Volume 3 Issue 1. Issue included information referring to
verifying income and hours, ERDC hours, marginal income, two parent
working families, child support and ERDC, prospective eligibility and
budgeting and transitioning TANF to ERDC.
In August of 2018, tools were developed and shared with field staff
during the year in efforts to improve co—pay calculations and
documentation. An ERDC mini-training was offered and a Child Care
Policy transmittal was reissued to department staff as an important
reminder of increased accuracy in the ERDC program. Another edition of
an “Accuracy in Action” newsletter was issued focusing on ERDC
budgeting and child care hours.
Finding 2017-019: Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Improve Controls over Payroll
WIA/WIOA Adult Program (17.258)
WIA/WIOA Youth Activities (17.259)
WIA/WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grants (17.278)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $89,535
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Management timely review all timesheets to ensure employee time is
appropriately coded for program purposes. We also recommend
management reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-027: Department of Human Services
Strengthen Controls over Client Payments, Payroll Processes, and
Cell Phone Review
Rehabilitation Services – Vocational Rehabilitation
Grants to States (84.126)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $60 (known)
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management strengthen its controls to ensure appropriate
expenditures are charged to the federal program and that timely reviews
of client payments, monthly employee timesheets, and cell phone
invoices are performed.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-98-
Finding 2017-028: Department of Human Services
Improve Controls over Federal Financial Reporting
Rehabilitation Services – Vocational Rehabilitation
Grants to States (84.126)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management submit accurate RSA-2 reports and strengthen
its controls over RSA-2 reports to ensure the reports are properly
prepared, adequately supported, and properly reviewed.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-029: Department of Human Services
Procurement Controls Not Always Followed and New Contracting
System Not Reviewed
Rehabilitation Services – Vocational Rehabilitation
Grants to States (84.126)
Procurement and Suspension and Debarment
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management strengthen controls to ensure all procurement
procedures are followed, including the verification of suspension and
debarment for all contracts, and maintain supporting evidence for
procedures performed. We further recommend department management
create and implement review procedures over its new CSTAT system to
ensure controls over procurement procedures are operating effectively.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  The Office of Contracts and Procurement (OC&P) began with the month
of December 2018, pulling a query of all executed contracts from each
month as recorded in the CSTAT database. A formula is used to perform a
random selection process of 25% of all contracts or amendments
executed within that month that meet the criteria of any dollar value not
to exceed (NTE) amount, inclusive of increases to NTE on amendments.
The entire electronic contract file is reviewed for completeness, including
CSTAT entries related to the contract. If an error or omission is
discovered in the documentation, the compliance manager informs the
contract specialist’s manager by email of the nature of the error. Errors
are recorded with the review of the contract file, as well as
documentation from the contract specialist once the correction has been
made. Managers review the contract errors and corrections with staff
during employee development meetings. All documentation is
maintained in an excel spreadsheet by month for each month audited.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-99-
Finding 2017-031: Oregon Commission for the Blind
Improve Controls over Federal Financial Reporting
Rehabilitation Services – Vocational Rehabilitation
Grants to States (84.126)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Commission management correct the financial reports and implement
controls to ensure future reports contain accurate information, are
supported by accounting records, and follow federal reporting guidelines.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  Correction of the SF-425 reports impacted by this finding have been
completed and resubmitted to RSA as of January 22, 2019. The CFO for
CFB has completed Federal Fiscal training for the SF-425. Internal review
by second individual of report data for accuracy prior to submission to be
implemented for the upcoming March 31, 2020 reporting period.
Corrections to the RSA-2 have been completed and the 2016 report has
been resubmitted to RSA. The process for compilation of the information
has been expanded to include additional checks and balances. These new
steps were tested with the RSA-2 for 2017 and this report has also been
resubmitted to the RSA. The CFO for CFB has completed Federal Fiscal
training for the RSA-2.
Finding 2017-032: Department of Fish and Wildlife
Establish Controls over Financial Reporting and Ensure In-Kind
State Match is Adequately Supported
Fish and Wildlife Cluster (15.605, 15.611)
Reporting, Matching
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $14,211 (known)
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management ensure federal financial reports are
independently reviewed and adequately supported before submission.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  ODFW analyzed internal controls and risks associated with the SF-425
and found that existing controls adequately manage the risk of significant
reporting errors and maintain compliance with applicable requirements.
As of June 2019, ODFW adopted an SF-425 risk assessment and review
procedure, which further ensures regular review and monitoring of the
risks and internal controls associated with SF-425 reporting.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-100-
With regard to in-kind match documentation, we anticipate the
implementation of our new Volunteer and Event Management System
(VEM) to occur by the end of calendar year 2020. One intent of the new
VEM system is to standardize the timekeeping process for volunteer
labor.  The documentation/reports available from the new system are
expected to be a significant improvement over the current paper
timesheets.
Finding 2017-033: Department of Fish and Wildlife
Implement Monitoring and Maintenance of Real Property
Fish and Wildlife Cluster (15.605, 15.611)
Equipment and Real Property Management
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management finalize and implement policies and procedures
to ensure compliance with real property federal requirements.
Status: Partial corrective action taken.
Agency response:  As of June 2019, the department adopted a Real Property Management
Policy to strengthen the department’s ability to comply with federal and
state real property management requirements. In addition, ODFW plans
to implement a modern asset management system within the next year,
which will improve the agency’s efforts to monitor real property.
Finding 2017-034: Department of Fish and Wildlife
Improve Controls over Directly Allocated Costs
Fish and Wildlife Cluster (15.605, 15.611)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $454 (known); $21,000 (likely)
Initial Year:  2016
Recommendation: Department management review their methods and processes for
allocating direct costs to programs and improve controls to ensure
adherence to cost principles. Specifically, we recommend management
require that sufficient documentation of the basis applied to allocating
costs is maintained and periodically reviewed to ensure costs reflect
actual benefit to the program, are accurately calculated, and are
consistently applied across programs and other department activities.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
-101-
Finding 2017-035: Department of Fish and Wildlife
Include Only Paid Hunting and Angling Licenses in Certification
Report
Fish and Wildlife Cluster (15.605, 15.611)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management correct and resubmit the certification and
implement a more robust review process to ensure the certification is
accurate prior to submission.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2017-036: Department of Fish and Wildlife
Consistently Apply Controls over Procurements
Fish and Wildlife Cluster (15.605, 15.611)
Procurement, Suspension, and Debarment
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:  2017
Recommendation: Department management require the consistent application of controls
to ensure compliance with federal requirements over procurement.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Appendix A
-102-
Summaries of Related Audit Reports Issued by the
Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division
Summaries of selected performance and information technology audit reports issued during
2019 are included here for informational purposes as subjects may relate to federal programs
administered in Oregon.
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER:  Department of Human Services, Oregon Health Authority
Integrated Eligibility Project Has Generally Followed
Industry Standards to Help Ensure Data is Converted
Completely and Accurately; Report No. 2019-37
REPORT DATE:  October 2019
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  Public assistance programs provide a vital safety net and are
funded through a combination of state and federal resources.
In fiscal year 2018, Oregon spent approximately $13 billion
on public assistance programs, approximately 46% of all state
expenditures.
What We Found
1. The Integrated Eligibility Project team has generally
followed industry standards for data conversion.
2. Despite sufficient planning efforts, risks remain that could
negatively impact the Integrated Eligibility Project.
a.   Limited testing of data extracts creates a risk that
data conversion could be relying upon incomplete
or erroneous data.
b.   Unknown staffing needs post-data conversion
creates the potential for negative client experience
through long wait times.
c.   Shared accounts weaken security and
accountability if misuse of sensitive data occurs.
d.   Missing contract terms limit the ability to hold
contractor accountable in the event of a data
breach.
What We Recommend
The Department of Human Services and the Oregon Health
Authority should remediate a potential testing gap; develop
staffing plans for work resulting from data conversion
activities; eliminate the use of shared accounts to transmit
sensitive information; and update existing contracts to
include clauses required under federal law.
Appendix A
-103-
Both agencies agreed with all of our recommendations. Their
response can be found at the end of the report. The report
includes a risk assessment we communicated to the
Integrated Eligibility Project team in March 2019.
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER:  Recommendation Follow-up Report:  DHS Has Made
Important Improvements, but Extensive Work Remains
to Ensure Child Safety; Report No. 2019-24
REPORT DATE:  June 2019
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  The purpose of this report is to follow up on the
recommendations we made to the Department of Human
Services (DHS) as included in audit report 2018-05, “Foster
Care in Oregon: Chronic management failures and high
caseloads jeopardize the safety of some of the state’s most
vulnerable children.”
The Department of Human Services (DHS) made progress on
all 24 recommendations from the original audit, fully
implementing eight. However, extensive work remains to
improve child safety in the foster care and child welfare
system, including increasing staffing and addressing a
continued shortfall of foster homes and residential beds.
Findings from the Original Audit
»    Chronic management failures and high caseloads
jeopardize child safety.
»    Child welfare workers are burning out and leaving in high
numbers.
»    The supply of suitable foster homes and residential
facilities is dwindling.
»    Prior management response to these issues was slow,
indecisive, and inadequate.
Improvements Noted
»     Agency leadership has begun implementing solutions,
including improving DHS’s work culture.
»     DHS has enhanced support services and added training
for field staff.
»     The agency houses fewer children in hotels, though it still
places some in sub-optimal settings.
Remaining Areas of Concern
»     Caseworkers and other staff remain overburdened and
turnover remains high, jeopardizing child safety.
Appendix A
-104-
»     Management has not yet clearly communicated its staffing
deficits to the Legislature.
»     The state still lacks enough foster homes and in-state
residential beds for high-needs children.
»     Critical data on staffing and placements is not being
collected.
»     The new central abuse reporting hotline has experienced
substantial transition issues.
The status of each recommendation and full results of our
follow-up work are detailed in the report.
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER:  Recommendation Follow-up Report: Oregon Health
Authority Should Improve Efforts to Detect and Prevent
Improper Medicaid Payments; Report No. 2019-13
REPORT DATE:  March 2019
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  The purpose of this report is to follow up on the
recommendations we made to the Oregon Health Authority
(OHA) as included in audit report 2017-25, “Oregon Health
Authority Should Improve Efforts to Detect and Prevent
Improper Medicaid Payments.”
Recommendation Follow-up Results
At the time of the original audit, the Oregon Health Authority
(OHA) agreed with all eight recommendations we made. Our
follow-up work shows OHA has made progress to implement
those recommendations, with two fully implemented and six
partially implemented. While OHA has made progress, more
work is still needed to fully resolve these recommendations
and further improve processes to reduce improper payments.
Highlights from the Original Audit
The Secretary of State’s Audit Division found OHA recovery
efforts are appropriate and reasonable, but the agency should
strengthen efforts to detect and prevent improper payments.
We also found delays in processing eligibility for thousands of
Medicaid recipients, which resulted in millions of dollars of
avoidable expenditures, a critical issue the agency failed to
disclose until raised in a May 2017 Auditor Alert.
The primary purpose of the original audit was to determine if
OHA could improve processes to prevent, detect, and recover
improper Medicaid payments. The secondary purpose was to
follow up on OHA’s progress to resolve Medicaid eligibility
issues we raised in our May 2017 Auditor Alert.
Appendix A
-105-
Key Findings from the Original Audit
1.  OHA has gaps in procedures for preventing certain
improper payments. Insufficient management of the
agency’s processes for identifying and resolving payment
and eligibility issues, prioritization of staffing resources,
and efforts to address technology issues put taxpayer
dollars at risk.
2.  OHA lacks well-defined, consistent, and agency-wide
processes to detect certain improper payments, especially
related to coordinated care. We identified approximately
31,300 questionable payments based on our review of 15
months of data. OHA needs to continue researching these
claims to determine how many were improper; OHA
reported that only a small percentage were improper
based on preliminary research of 2,700 claims.
3.  OHA recovery efforts appear appropriate and reasonable,
but may be underutilized due to OHA’s limited procedures
for detecting improper payments.
4.  OHA reported completing the action plan to determine
eligibility for the remaining backlog of 115,200 Medicaid
recipients. Approximately 47,600 (41%) were deemed
ineligible as a result, although this figure may decrease
slightly through the end of November. Failure to address
this issue in a timely fashion resulted in approximately
$88 million in avoidable expenditures.
The status of each recommendation and full results of our
follow-up work are detailed in the report.
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER:  Department of Human Services
Consumer-Employer Provider Program Needs Immediate
Action to Ensure In-Home Care
Consumers Receive Required Care and Services; Report
No. 2019-05
REPORT DATE:  February 2019
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  The purpose of this report is to follow up on the
recommendations we made to the Department of Human
Services (DHS) as included in audit report 2017-23,
“Consumer-Employer Provider Program (CEP) Needs
Immediate Action to Ensure In-Home Care Consumers
Receive Required Care and Services.”
Recommendation Follow-up Results
Appendix A
-106-
At the time of the original audit, the Department of Human
Services (DHS) fully agreed with 10 recommendations we
made and partially agreed with one recommendation. Our
follow-up work shows DHS has fully implemented four of
those recommendations since the initial report. While the
agency has made progress, significant work is needed to
implement the remaining seven recommendations. Resolving
these recommendations will help improve the safety and
well-being of the older adults and people with disabilities
who participate in the program.
Highlights from the Original Audit
The Secretary of State’s Audits Division found that the Aging
and People with Disabilities (APD) program should take
immediate action to address gaps in program design and
oversight in order to improve the safety and wellbeing of
participants in the Consumer-Employed Provider (CEP)
program.
Key Findings from the Original Audit
The effectiveness of the CEP program is dependent on the
consumer, the case manager, and the homecare worker. If
each is capable, competent, and supported in their role, the
model can be successful. Our audit found:
1.  Some consumers are not receiving the support necessary
to ensure required employer duties are being performed,
which adds to case managers’ and homecare workers’
responsibilities.
2.  Case managers are not consistently contacting consumers,
or monitoring services consumers receive, due to
excessive workloads.
3.  Agency requirements do not ensure that homecare
workers are prepared to provide the care and assistance
consumers need.
4.  Due to current data collection and utilization practices, it is
difficult for APD to determine if consumers are safe and
receiving the care and services they need.
5.  Current deficiencies in the program may put consumers’
health and well-being at risk and keep the program from
operating as intended.
The status of each recommendation and full results of our
follow-up work are detailed in the report.
Key Audit Members
Mary Wenger, CPA, Deputy Director
Dale Bond, CPA, Audit Manager
Julianne Kennedy, CPA, Audit Manager
Kelly Olson, CPA, Audit Manager
Janet Lowrey, CPA, Senior Auditor
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of Public
Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected Secretary of State and is
independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon government.
The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards and commissions as well as
administer municipal audit law.
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500 | Salem | OR | 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits