Secretary of State Bev Clarno
Audits Division Director Kip Memmott
Department of Administrative Services and Enterprise Information
Services
The State Does Not Have A Privacy Program to
Manage Enterprise Data Privacy Risk
November 2020
Report 2020-37
Department of Administrative Services, Enterprise
Information Services
The State Does Not Have A Privacy Program
to Manage Enterprise Data Privacy Risk
What We Found
1. Oregon does not have a statewide official responsible or accountable for
managing data privacy risk. (pg. 7)
2. Enterprise Information Services (EIS) has not provided agencies with
clear guidance on how to respond to a security incident involving PII.
(pg. 10)
3. Though still developing foundational policy and strategy, the Chief Data
Officer has made progress in implementing enterprise data governance
requirements. (pg. 12)
What We Recommend
Our report includes one recommendation to EIS. Although COVID-19 has
negatively affected the state budget, we recommend EIS request funding to
establish a statewide privacy office and appoint a senior official responsible
for managing an enterprise privacy program. Additionally, EIS should clarify
roles and provide training to ensure agency personnel understand their role
in responding to incidents involving PII.
EIS agreed with our recommendation. Their response can be found at the end
of the report.
Why This Audit is
Important
» Growth in information
technology has made it easier
to collect personally
identifiable information (PII),
which puts that information
at increased risk of being
compromised.
» State agencies collect PII on
virtually all Oregonians,
including health and vital
records, driving records,
education data, and tax
information.
» The federal government
lacks a current and
comprehensive privacy law,
leaving states to pursue
legislation to ensure data
privacy is adequately
addressed.
» Across 17 sectors, the public
sector takes the second
longest to detect and contain
a data breach. Longer
response times result in
increased exposure of
compromised data.
» In 2017, Oregon enacted
House Bill 3361, which
established open data and
data governance
requirements, including some
tasks related to information
privacy.
The Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division is an independent, nonpartisan organization that conducts audits based on
objective, reliable information to help state government operate more efficiently and effectively. The summary above should be
considered in connection with a careful review of the full report.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 1
Introduction
Oregon state agencies, boards, and commissions collect and store tremendous amounts of
personally identifiable information (PII) as part of their various business processes. People
provide their personal information to state agencies for a variety of reasons, such as licensing,
financial assistance, and social services. Providing these services often requires state agencies to
maintain PII related to protected health information, criminal history records, driving records,
tax information, and various licensing data, to name a few. Entities that collect PII should ensure
the privacy and protection of such data.
Enterprise Information Services (EIS) maintains statewide information technology (IT) policy
and oversight. The office’s responsibilities include oversight of IT security for executive branch
state agencies. In 2017, the Legislature approved funding for the Chief Data Officer (CDO), which
also resides within EIS.
The purpose of this audit was to assess whether Oregon has a governance structure in place to
manage the risks to data privacy for the PII it collects. As part of this effort, we assessed the
status of the CDO’s progress in implementing privacy-related requirements set forth by the
Legislature in 2017.
Data privacy is a complex topic
While most people agree that data privacy is important, the concept of data privacy is difficult to
succinctly describe. The International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) does not
provide a definition of privacy, but notes that it is a nebulous concept which means different
things to different people.1 We identified the following definitions of privacy from other sources:
1 The IAPP is a not-for-profit professional community and resource committed to providing a forum for privacy professionals to
share best practices, track trends, advance privacy management issues, standardize the designations for privacy professionals, and
provide education and guidance on opportunities in the field of information privacy.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 2
• “The right to be left alone and to keep certain matters secluded from public view.” -
Oxford Dictionary of Law;
• “The right of a party to maintain control over and confidentiality of information about
itself.” – National Institute of Standards and Technology; and
• "The rights of an individual to trust that others will appropriately and respectfully use,
store, share, and dispose of his/her associated personal and sensitive information in
accordance for the purposes for which it was collected or derived ... and to reasonably
control and be aware of the collection, use, and disclosure of associated personal and
sensitive information.” – ISACA2
These definitions encompass two main elements:
the right of individuals to decide how their
personal information is used and the right to
have their information remain safe. The first
focuses primarily on privacy, while the latter
focuses on security, complicating the task of
untangling data privacy from information
security. In general, privacy programs are
responsible for managing risks to individuals
associated with processing PII, while security
programs are responsible for ensuring the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
information.
Although security is an important consideration for an effective privacy program, privacy risk
management must also address factors such as compliance with privacy laws and mechanisms
to communicate data processing options and preferences. Similarly, security programs must
strive to protect information beyond PII, such as ensuring the integrity of state financial records
or the availability of information systems through which public services are provided. While
these two concepts are each important and complex unto themselves, they are also closely
intertwined, in that the security of PII is an integral element of an effective privacy program.
For the purpose of this audit, we define PII as the information that can be used to identify an
individual.
While definitions vary, PII generally includes social security numbers, date and place
of birth, or a person’s full name. Additionally, data that is not considered PII, such as a person’s
employer, can become PII when combined with other identifying information, such as date and
place of birth. However, not all PII is created equal; some is more sensitive and could result in
greater harm if disclosed. For example, an individual’s social security number is more sensitive
than their zip code. Safeguards should be considered based on the sensitivity of the information.
Individuals and organizations both have a stake in data privacy
Human beings value their privacy. However, state agencies often require PII in order to provide
services. When people interact with the online forms and agency computer systems that collect
PII, they may not realize the potential risks to their privacy as they interact with those systems.
Moreover, this risk may not be fully recognized by the organizations that collect the information.
2 ISACA is a global professional community that strives to inspire and enable innovation through technology by researching and
developing solutions, best practices, and frameworks, as well as offering professional certifications and facilitating community
collaboration.
Figure 1: Security and privacy are distinct but
intersecting concepts
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 3
As the growth in IT has made it easier to collect, maintain, and
store data about an individual, incidents of data loss and
unauthorized use of data have also grown in both the public and
private sectors. Such incidents can lead to identity theft or
fraudulent activity that may result in inconvenience,
embarrassment, financial loss, or other harm for the individual.
Beyond the threat of identity theft or fraud, inappropriate access to
personal information may lead to social issues such as unequal
bargaining position, discrimination, and encroachment on moral
freedom and human dignity.
State agencies also face consequences if data privacy is not adequately managed. Failure to
maintain compliance with federal regulations can result in financial penalties. Additionally,
agencies who fail to adequately ensure individual privacy may face a loss of public trust and
potential litigation from individuals whose information is compromised.
Data breaches are inevitable — it is not a matter of if, but when, a breach will occur. While the
severity of a breach may vary, private companies, such as Equifax and Target, have made
headlines over breaches that affected millions of customers. Government entities have also been
affected. In 2019, the Texas Health and Human Services Commission was fined $1.6 million
when a data breach made the personal health information of 6,617 people available online. In
2020, Oregon was one of 28 states involved in a multi-state settlement agreement with
Tennessee-based Community Health Services, Inc., following a 2014 data breach which copied
and transferred data from approximately 6.1 million patients, including names, birthdates,
addresses, and social security numbers.
Similar breaches have occurred in Oregon. In 2014, the personal information of more than
851,300 people was compromised after a breach at the Oregon Employment Department. In
2019, the Oregon Health Authority notified the public that a breach compromised the protected
health information of patients at the Oregon State Hospital. Not all breaches threaten PII or
individual privacy; however, Oregon must be diligent in its efforts to mitigate the risk of data
breaches, especially those involving the PII of Oregonians.
Data privacy laws and regulations are evolving
A major component of mitigating privacy risk is
ensuring compliance with privacy laws and
regulations. As technology advances, laws are
created or amended to address new threats and
vulnerabilities.
It is critical for entities that collect
PII to understand the ever-evolving data privacy
landscape and to implement effective tools and
processes to ensure compliance with current legal
requirements.
Data privacy laws have spread globally since
originating at the national level over a century
ago. Privacy laws now exist in places throughout
the world, but vary in form by country and region.
Of significance is the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR), enacted by the European
Union in 2016. The GDPR establishes privacy
standards for any organization, including
government bodies, that targets or collects data
Privacy risk
The risk to individuals that
a disclosure of their private
information could result in
personal or financial harm,
discrimination, and
encroachment.
Figure 2: GDPR establishes certain rights for
data subjects in the European Union
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 4
related to people in the European Union and levies fines for those who violate those standards.
GDPR sets forth principles related to the processing of personal data and the rights for
individuals. This legislation has invigorated discussions on privacy legislation in the United
States and globally.
States have begun to address gaps in federal privacy law
At a federal level, the U.S. lacks a current and comprehensive privacy law. The Privacy Act of
1974 establishes fair information practices for personal information collected and maintained in
information systems by federal agencies. However, an overview of the Act issued by the U.S.
Department of Justice Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties in 2015 stated that “the Act’s
imprecise language, limited legislative history, and somewhat outdated regulatory guidelines
have rendered it a difficult statute to decipher and apply.”
In the five years since the U.S. Department of Justice’s review of the federal Privacy Act, there has
been little traction at the federal level to implement a comprehensive approach to address
privacy, despite the introduction of several bills aimed at doing so. Though a comprehensive
federal approach is lacking, several regulations set forth requirements to protect personal
information relevant to specific industries, such as student records and protected health
information. See Figure 3 for some of the relevant laws and regulations.
Figure 3: Privacy laws, regulations, and related security requirements remain fragmented
In lieu of a comprehensive federal approach, government leaders around the nation are
pursuing privacy legislation at the state level. However, until recently, these bills have been
narrowly scoped, addressing privacy issues in specific sectors.
Recently, states have begun introducing more comprehensive privacy legislation. In 2018, the
California Consumer Privacy Act was passed as a landmark bill that provides an overarching
approach to privacy and strong privacy protections for California consumers. Since that time,
several other states have introduced comprehensive privacy legislation, though some states
have struggled to enact these bills into law. This decentralized approach to privacy may lead to a
3 Download the Overview of the Privacy Act at https://www.justice.gov/opcl/overview-privacy-act-1974-2015-edition.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 5
heavy burden on affected organizations and confusing or conflicting information on what rights
individuals possess.
Oregon lacks a comprehensive privacy law
Privacy is such an important topic that some states have explicit privacy protections written into
their constitutions; Oregon is not one of them. Moreover, as portrayed in Figure 4,
comprehensive privacy legislation has not been introduced in the state, although various bills
have been introduced to address targeted privacy considerations.
For example, in 2019, Senate Bill 684 established requirements for certain entities which
possess personal information to notify consumers of a breach of security. House Bill 2866, also
introduced in the 2019 session, would have required entities collecting data to provide clear
disclosures and receive express consent from individuals about what they were collecting and
how it would be used; however, the bill did not make it out of committee.
Figure 4: The IAPP identified 27 states which have introduced comprehensive privacy bills since 2018
Source: IAPP US State Comprehensive Privacy Law Comparison.
In 2019, Oregon’s Attorney General convened a Consumer Privacy Task Force to discuss
developments in privacy legislation and consider policy solutions for Oregon. The Attorney
General’s Office has begun to draft a legislative concept relating to consumer privacy rights and
establishing requirements for entities that do business with Oregonians.
EIS is responsible for IT oversight in Oregon
Oregon does not have a department or senior agency official charged with managing privacy risk
at the state. However, the State Chief Information Officer is responsible for implementing and
maintaining IT governance for state executive department agencies and heads EIS, an
organizational division of the Department of Administrative Services.
The State Chief Information Officer and EIS responsibilities include, among other things,
adopting rules, policies, and standards for operating IT; making recommendations to the
Governor and Legislature concerning IT budget requests; adopting information security plans,
rules, policies, and standards; and developing and promoting IT training programs. EIS functions
within the state’s hybrid model of IT management, wherein EIS provides policy and oversight
while agencies are responsible for designing and delivering information systems.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 6
While EIS is organizationally positioned within the Department of Administrative Services, the
State Chief Information Officer reports directly to the Governor, rather than to the agency
director. EIS is funded primarily through an assessment of state agencies based on the number
of positions. In the 2019-21 biennium, EIS had a total approved budget of $80 million and
included 118 positions. EIS is comprised of six programs: Project Portfolio Performance, Shared
Services, Data Center Services, Cyber Security Services, Strategy and Design, and Data
Governance and Transparency.
Data Governance and Transparency is led by the CDO, a position created by the Legislature in
2017 with the passage of House Bill 3361. The CDO was charged with specific tasks related to
enterprise data governance and open data, including maintaining a central web portal,
developing technical standards for publishing data through the web portal, and establishing an
enterprise data and information strategy. Our audit assessed the CDO’s status on implementing
certain elements of the bill related to data governance and privacy.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 7
Audit Results
While essential to the delivery of services by state agencies, the increasing use of technology
magnifies the potential harm to an individual’s privacy. Agencies use technology to collect,
maintain, use, disseminate, and dispose of sensitive information for virtually all Oregonians.
However, the state has not developed an organizational infrastructure to ensure that privacy
risks are identified and managed throughout the enterprise, including processes to ensure
incidents involving PII are appropriately handled. Without appropriate management throughout
the entire data lifecycle, PII could be lost or inappropriately disclosed, putting people at an
increased risk for identity theft or other harm.
Oregon does not have a statewide program to manage data privacy risk
State agencies electronically collect and store Oregonians’ personal information, such as
protected health information, personal income tax data, driving records, criminal history
information, and education data. The state has an ethical responsibility to its citizens to
understand and address the privacy implications associated with the data it collects. Moreover,
many agencies are required to comply with federal regulations governing data privacy and may
be required to comply with one or more of an evolving array of privacy laws.
Despite this, Oregon does not have a statewide program to assess and manage data privacy risk.
While some statewide officials have responsibilities that intersect with privacy risk
management, there is no enterprise program to ensure sensitive personal data collected by
agencies is kept private and protected and that privacy rights are communicated by all agencies
that collect such information.
Even without a statewide privacy program, state agencies need to address and manage their
privacy risks to comply with laws and federal regulations such as HIPAA and FERPA.4 To this
end, many agencies have developed roles and processes to comply with federal privacy
requirements. However, this fragmented approach across the enterprise falls short of ensuring
that PII held by the state is appropriately managed.
Foundational activities for effective privacy risk management include understanding the
organization’s risk tolerance, conducting a privacy risk assessment, and establishing privacy
values and policies to respond to identified risks. Privacy considerations should be embedded
into the entire data lifecycle, as noted in Figure 5, from before the data is collected until it is
ultimately destroyed. This requires identifying PII that is accessed or held by the organization as
well as third parties. Organizations should develop and implement a governance structure to
enable an ongoing understanding of their risk management priorities. This structure should
include a senior official with the authority, mission, and resources to manage privacy risk.
Figure 5: The data lifecycle shows how data moves through an organization
4 The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) requires the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services to issue privacy regulations governing individually identifiable health information. The Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA) is a federal law that protects the privacy of student education records.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 8
As state agencies in Oregon collect more citizen data, it is not only pertinent to institute a
privacy framework and program, but also to have someone who understands and can interpret
laws and regulations to help manage the potential privacy risks. However, Oregon does not have
a program or senior official accountable for managing statewide privacy risk.  While some
statewide officials have responsibilities that relate to privacy risk management, they are not
tasked with assessing data privacy risk or implementing processes to mitigate those risks.
The federal government and some other states have privacy officials
Senior privacy officials have been in place at the federal level for over a decade, though the role
continues to evolve. Executive branch federal agencies have been required to designate a senior
official responsible for information privacy since 2005; however, in 2016, policies on the role
and designation of the senior privacy official were revised. Federal agencies are required to
appoint a senior official with the expertise and authority to lead and direct the agency’s privacy
program and carry out privacy-related functions. This official is responsible for leading and
directing federal agency privacy programs, including developing privacy policy, overseeing
privacy compliance efforts, and managing privacy risks associated with activities that involve PII
throughout the data lifecycle.
While the nation’s first state chief privacy officer (CPO) was not hired until 2003 in West
Virginia, the role has recently gained momentum, with at least 12 states
having a CPO or similar position as of 2019. State governments often task
the CPO with managing legal risk, ensuring compliance with privacy laws
such as HIPAA and FERPA, and creating standards and policies around data
privacy risk and compliance. As such, those filling the roles of CPO often
have backgrounds in law, policy, government administration, privacy,
security, or technology. Law degrees are common among state CPOs,
though they typically sit within the state technology office.
As the role of the state CPO develops, states have taken different approaches to data privacy
governance. While some states continue to take a decentralized approach to managing privacy,
others have begun to develop a more centralized structure. For example, states such as
Kentucky, Maryland, and New Jersey have developed enterprise policies and procedures for
privacy risk assessments, data protection requirements, and individuals’ privacy rights.
The lack of a statewide privacy program exposes the state to several risks
EIS management has acknowledged the need for a senior privacy official at the statewide level.
To this end, they have begun to draft a legislative concept for the 2021 legislative session to
create a privacy office and appoint a statewide Chief Privacy Officer. However, with budget cuts
anticipated in the 2021 legislative session in the wake of COVID-19, this funding may not be
available.
Because no individual is tasked with privacy risk at the statewide level, the state has not
performed a privacy risk assessment to identify the risks to individuals that occur as a result of
the state’s collection of PII. Risk assessments are a critical step that help organizations
understand how their information systems and processes may create privacy risks for
individuals.5 Once risks are understood, the state can develop policies and procedures to
respond to those risks.
5 The NIST Privacy Framework provides that a privacy risk assessment consists of identifying problematic data actions and
determining risk based on the likelihood and impact of those actions. NIST emphasizes that impact determination should consider
the problems that may be created for individuals as well as the organization.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 9
Since the state has not established a privacy program, there is little guidance articulating the
safeguards agencies should have in place to ensure the protection and proper handling of PII.
This does not mean the state lacks any protections at an enterprise level. EIS provides guidance
and resources to support agencies in protecting their data when it is stored and transmitted.
Additionally, it has published an information security policy, plan, and standards to provide
direction for the security of information under the state’s control. However, this guidance does
not include information on what additional precautions should be in place to identify and ensure
the privacy and protection of the PII they collect. For example, additional safeguards may be
appropriate to control user access to PII, media sanitization when media contains PII, or
encryption techniques for devices storing PII.6
One gap identified during the audit is that there is some ambiguity regarding the definition of PII
in the state. While the Statewide Information Security Plan refers to the Oregon Consumer
Information Protection Act for the definition of PII for the state, other state statutes provide
different (though similar) definitions for PII.7
We sent a survey to 20 judgmentally selected state agencies, boards, and commissions to gain an
understanding of the staffing, policies, and procedures in place to address data privacy at the
agency level. Of those that responded to the audit survey, 100% of them collect and store PII
6 Media sanitization is the process to remove information from physical devices such that information recovery is not possible.
Encryption is the process that transforms usable data into an unreadable form.
7 See Appendix A for the definition of personal information provided in the Oregon Consumer Information Protection Act.
PII is collected by many agencies, but not clearly defined
Oregon’s statewide policies and legislation do not provide a universal definiti on of PII. In addition to the
definition of personal information set forth in the Oregon Consumer Information Protection Act, we
identified the following definitions of personally identifiable information in Oregon statute:
• Chapter 192 (Records; Public Reports and Meetings): Personally identifiable information means all
information relating to a person that acquires or uses a transit pass or other fare payment medium in
connection with an electronic fare collection system, including but not limited to: (i) Customer account
information, date of birth, telephone number, physical address, electronic mail address, credit or debit
card information, bank account information, Social Security or taxpayer identification number or other
identification number, transit pass or fare payment medium balances or history, or similar personal
information; or (ii) Travel dates, travel times, frequency of use, travel locations, service types or vehicle
use, or similar travel information.
• Chapter 319 (Motor Vehicle and Aircraft Fuel Taxes): Personally identifiable information means any
information that identifies or describes a person, including, but not limited to, the person’s travel
pattern data, per-mile road usage charge account number, address, telephone number, electronic mail
address, driver license or identification card number, registration plate number, photograph, recorded
images, bank account information and credit card number.
• Chapter 339 (School Attendance; Admission; Discipline; Safety): Personally identifiable information
means any information that would permit the identification of a person who reports information using
the tip line, and is not limited to name, phone number, physical address, electronic mail address, race,
gender, sexual orientation, disability designation, religious affiliation, national  origin, ethnicity, school
of attendance, city, county or any geographic identifier included in information conveyed through the
tip line, or information identifying the machine or device used by the person in making a report using
the tip line.
• Chapter 352 (Public Universities): As used in this section, “personally identifiable information” means a
student’s Social Security number and gender or a student’s Social Security number and date of birth.
• Chapter 432 (Vital Statistics): Personally identifiable information means information that can be used
to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity or, when combined with other personal or identifying
information, is linked or linkable to a specific individual.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 10
from Oregonians. However, without statewide consensus on what data constitutes PII, agencies
may not identify all data that is considered PII, particularly when established by statutes that
generally apply to programs at other agencies. Moreover, there is increased risk that agencies
may be unaware of laws and regulations that dictate how they handle such data.
If agencies do not know they possess PII, there is a risk that they will not have appropriate
safeguards in place to protect the data. These controls are necessary to ensure that PII is not
inappropriately disclosed, which may cause reputational or financial harm to individuals as a
result of identity theft or fraud.
Statewide policies and procedures do not address requirements for providing individuals with
notice about how PII is used or their choice in how it may be used, although some agencies may
have individual policies that address these requirements. Organizations should provide
individuals with information regarding its activities that impact privacy, what choices
individuals have regarding how the organization uses PII, and individuals’ ability to access and
have this information amended or corrected. Effective notice provides individuals with an
understanding of how their data will be used and allows them to make informed decisions prior
to providing PII to the state.
EIS has not provided agencies with clear guidance on how to respond to a
security incident involving PII
A key function of an effective privacy program is the ability to manage cybersecurity events that
affect data privacy. This is critical because, as private information flows through the data
lifecycle, each transaction increases the risk for data corruption, error, or leakage. In addition to
the potential costs to organizations, these incidents can result in reputational, emotional, or
financial harm for individuals, and in some cases, risks to physical safety.
The state lacks enterprise policies and procedures for how to respond to incidents where
PII has been compromised
The state does not have comprehensive guidance on how to respond to security incidents
involving PII. While statewide security incident response policies, procedures, standards, and
plans touch on some elements of what an agency should consider when responding to a security
incident involving PII, they do not address the risks specifically associated with a potential
breach of PII.
Leading practices state that organizations should develop an
incident response plan for incidents involving PII, which informs
policies and procedures on how to handle such incidents.
Policies
covering how to handle incidents involving PII should be
developed in addition to general incident response policies, as
these events are different from regular incidents and may require
additional actions. Security and privacy standards suggest that the
privacy incident response plan should be developed under the
leadership of a senior official responsible for maintaining a
privacy program.
While the state does not have a senior official responsible for
maintaining a statewide privacy program to guide the
development of a privacy incident response plan, state law tasks
the State Chief Information Officer with developing information
security policies and procedures, including developing and implementing policies for
responding to events that threaten information systems or information stored on such systems.
An information security
event is an observable,
measurable occurrence in
respect to an information
asset that is a deviation
from normal processes.
An incident is a single or
series of unwanted or
unexpected information
security events that result in
harm or pose a significant
threat of harm to
information assets.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 11
We reviewed incident response policies and procedures that the state has in place to determine
if they address the unique risks associated with incidents involving personal information.
We noted that there are processes in place to ensure agencies report a data breach once it has
occurred — the statewide security incident response policy states that any incident relevant to
the Oregon Consumer Information Protection Act should be reported to the incident response
team at EIS. The Act defines what constitutes a breach of personal information and what needs
to be reported to consumers and the state Attorney General if a breach of personal information
occurs. EIS has also worked with other stakeholders to develop guidance on steps agencies
should take to report an actual or potential data breach. However, statewide guidance does not
address whether adjustments to incident handling processes should be considered when an
incident involves PII to ensure a quick and effective response.
EIS has not developed a statewide training program for incident response
Once policies and procedures for responding to incidents involving PII are developed, they
should be communicated to information system users based on their roles and responsibilities.
Training may include incident simulations to test whether staff understand how to perform their
roles effectively.
In Oregon, the State Chief Information Officer is responsible for developing and promoting
information security training programs, but has not developed a training program to ensure
agencies understand how to respond to security incidents involving PII. While this is in part due
to a lack of statewide policies and procedures on which to base such training, management also
indicated that they have not developed an incident response training program for agency staff
because of ongoing changes in statewide security roles. For example, Senate Bill 90 in June 2017
restructured the state’s information security function and moved information security personnel
from state agencies to EIS.
Currently, there are some inconsistencies in the roles and responsibilities outlined in statewide
incident response plans, policies, and procedures. EIS is working with a consultant to help clarify
and define roles and responsibilities across state entities, including those of agencies and the
various divisions within EIS. In conjunction with this work, EIS is also in the process of revising
statewide incident response policies and procedures to more accurately reflect current roles and
processes.
Although EIS has not developed formal training on incidents involving PII, it has developed and
implemented an annual statewide security training which agencies are required to take through
the state’s online training platform. The training provides some examples of reportable incidents
and links to supporting guidance on how to report a security incident. However, it does not
provide details on what steps an agency should take to analyze and contain an incident involving
PII. EIS management stated that they also provide some ad hoc incident response training in
response to security assessments or agency requests. Additionally, some agency leaders
indicated that they provide training for their employees on disclosure and proper handling of
sensitive information, such as federal tax information or health information.
8 Senate Bill 90 “Transfers information technology security functions of certain state agencies in executive branch to State Chief
Information Officer.”
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 12
Without statewide policies, procedures, and
training on how to respond to incidents
involving PII, incident response personnel
may not effectively, efficiently, and
consistently respond to security incidents
involving PII. For example, personnel
responding to a security incident may
inappropriately shut down a system, resulting
in the loss of forensic data needed to resolve
the incident. Additionally, incidents may
continue to occur for longer periods of time
before they are detected and contained. A
2020 study sponsored by IBM Security found
that the average time for companies to detect
and contain a breach was 280 days. The study
found that, across 17 industry sectors, the
public sector had the second highest amount
of time to detect and contain a data breach,
with an average of 324 days.
9 This can result
in increased breach response costs and
increased exposure of sensitive data.
The state’s Chief Data Officer is making progress implementing enterprise
data governance
Foundational data governance policy and strategy documents are in development
House Bill 3361 was enacted in August 2017 with an effective date of January 1, 2018. The bill
charged the State Chief Information Officer with appointing a CDO to oversee enterprise open
data standards set forth in the bill. Deadlines were established for some requirements, including:
• November 5, 2018: The CDO shall first publish the technical standards manual for publishing
data through the web portal maintained by the CDO; and
• May 1, 2019: Sections of the bill requiring release of publishable data and information
management by state agencies become operative.
However, six months after the bill became effective, the State Chief Information Officer resigned
before appointing a CDO. The state’s Deputy Chief Information Officer stepped in as interim
before being permanently appointed to the position in December of 2018. During this transition,
the interim State Chief Information Officer performed a nationwide search for the CDO who
started on January 14, 2019 — over two months after the first deliverable was due. The CDO is
now working toward new deadlines to publish the technical standards manual by February
2021 and for agencies to comply with the manual by October 2021.
9 The health care sector took the most time to identify and contain a data breach, with an average of 329 days.
Figure 6: The cost of a breach is quantifiable in time
and dollars
Source: Ponemon Institute’s 2020 Cost of a Data Breach
Report (research sponsored by IBM Security).
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 13
The CDO’s responsibilities include creating
an enterprise data inventory, which is a
key element to the open data initiative.
Agencies, in turn, are responsible for
creating and maintaining an inventory of
their information resources that will be
included in the statewide inventory. The
CDO has developed draft guidance to assist
state agencies in designing a method to
inventory their data as well as a template
to provide agencies with a standard format
and methodology to inventory their
information assets. A group of pilot
agencies have begun to submit draft
inventories;
however, final guidance on
initiating agency data inventories has not
yet been released.
Developing an inventory of data elements
is a critical first step to managing privacy
risk. Organizations must know what data
they possess before they can effectively
protect that data. While the CDO has made
progress in creating an enterprise data
inventory, they emphasized that the
enterprise inventory created to comply
with House Bill 3361 is intended to
support the open data initiative. While the
inventory template provided for agencies
includes a field to indicate whether a data
set contains PII, the inventory is not
intended to support privacy risk
management by providing a robust
inventory of PII collected and stored by
state agencies.
The CDO has also worked with an advisory
group to develop a draft state data
strategy. The first draft strategy was
posted online for public comment from July 6 to August 24, 2020; a second draft was posted
October 26 and is open for public comment through December 15, 2020. The state strategy
emulates the 2020 federal data strategy in that it establishes principles, practices, and action
items to better utilize data held by government agencies.
Oregon’s draft strategy lays out 10 data principles and 36 data practices to create consistent and
efficient data management across state agencies.
The draft strategy includes practices to
“preserve the privacy, quality, and integrity of data” by establishing “centralized privacy
guidelines,” and an action plan to outline how this will be achieved.
The CDO was also charged with providing information protection and privacy guidance for
agencies; however, work has just begun on this requirement, as the CDO has prioritized
development of the statewide data strategy and open data initiative in the office’s first two years.
See Figure 8 for the status on other tasks assigned to the CDO.
Figure 7: The State CDO started after the first deadline had
already passed
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 14
The CDO lacks resources to support agencies in fulfilling open data requirements
effectively and efficiently
The first responsibility assigned to
the CDO in House Bill 3361 is to
maintain a central web portal on
which agencies will release
publishable data. However, the CDO
may not have the human resources
necessary to fully support agencies
in their implementation of these
requirements. Currently, the CDO is
the only person in EIS working on
the open data initiative. While EIS
management expressed confidence
in their ability to meet the CDO’s
deadlines, they also expressed
concern that the office will not have
the staff necessary to support agencies in publishing data on the open data portal.
In addition to establishing requirements for the CDO to publish the technical standards manual
and maintain the open data portal, House Bill 3361 requires agencies to release publishable data
on the web portal in accordance with the technical standards manual. According to EIS, agencies
must comply with the open data standard and technical standards manual by October 2021.
While the final standard is not expected to be published until February 2021; a draft version of
the open data standard indicates that agencies must begin publishing data by June 2022.
However, EIS has identified a risk that the open data initiative may not be effectively and
efficiently implemented without additional centralized support for agencies. Management
believes there is an opportunity to support a more effective and efficient implementation of data
publication by developing centralized resources to provide guidance, support, and where
possible, process automation to agencies as they endeavor to publish their data sets.
When the open data initiative was first introduced to the Legislature in 2017, the request
included only one position — the CDO. The initial request did not include funding for the
personnel necessary to sustain the work. The Legislature voiced concern as to the sufficiency of
the original funding request to support the open data initiative during a public hearing in 2017.
EIS leadership at the time responded that the modest request was intended as a starting point.
Current leadership is now developing a policy option package for the 2021 legislative session to
request additional positions and technical resources.
While additional resources may help address the risk that agencies will not be able to effectively
and efficiently publish data as required by House Bill 3361, the current budget environment is
grim due to reduced state revenues as a result of COVID-19. Accordingly, additional funding in
the 2021 legislative session may not be forthcoming. Because leading practices suggest that
organizations should consider alternative responses to address an identified risk, it may benefit
EIS to identify alternative strategies to support agencies in their efforts to comply with open
data requirements set forth by the Legislature with current resources.
Figure 8:  The CDO has made progress on privacy and data
governance requirements
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 15
Recommendations
In order to develop an effective structure to manage enterprise privacy risk and ensure all
agency personnel throughout the enterprise understand their role in responding to an incident
involving PII, we recommend that EIS:
1. Request funding to establish a statewide privacy office and appoint a Chief Privacy
Officer, or similar role, whose position will have the authority, mission, accountability,
and resources to coordinate and develop statewide privacy requirements. Charge the
CPO with the following tasks:
a. Develop a strategic plan and timeline for coordinating an enterprise privacy risk
assessment, developing statewide policies and procedures to manage and
monitor privacy risk, and providing privacy training to agency personnel and
third parties engaged in data processing;
b. Work with other state officials as necessary to ensure roles for responding to
incidents involving PII are clearly and consistently articulated in statewide
policies, procedures, and plans; and
c. Once roles are clearly established, work with other state officials as necessary to
ensure incident response training is provided to agency personnel consistent
with assigned roles and responsibilities.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 16
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
Objective
The objectives for this audit were to:
1. Determine whether EIS has developed and implemented a governance structure to
manage enterprise data privacy risk.
2. Determine whether EIS has provided policies, guidance, and training to ensure agencies
understand their roles and responsibilities when responding to a security incident
resulting in the unauthorized use or disclosure of personally identifiable information.
3. Determine the status of EIS’ implementation of enterprise data governance and privacy-
related requirements assigned to the state’s CDO by the Legislature in 2017.
Scope
This audit focused on the governance structures in place to manage statewide privacy and
incident response related to PII. Auditors also assessed the status of the CDO’s efforts to
implement enterprise data governance and privacy-related requirements set forth by the
Legislature in 2017 (i.e., requirements established in House Bill 3361 in the 2017 Regular
Session); we did not evaluate the sufficiency of internal controls for our assessment of the status
of House Bill 3361.
Although privacy and information security overlap, this audit focused on privacy controls; we
did not assess the sufficiency of information security controls.
While performing our audit, we considered the effects that COVID-19 may have on the audit
topic.
The following internal control principles were relevant to our audit objectives:
• Control Environment
o We considered whether the oversight body oversees the internal control system
relevant to data privacy.
o We considered whether management has established an organizational structure,
assigned responsibility, and delegated authority to achieve the entity’s objectives
relevant to privacy and incident response related to PII.
• Risk Assessment
o We considered whether management has defined objectives clearly to enable the
identification of risks and define risk tolerances relevant to data privacy.
• Control Activities
o We considered whether management has designed the entity’s information system
and related control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks relevant to
incident response related to PII.
• Information and Communication
o We considered whether management internally and externally communicated the
necessary quality information to achieve the entity’s objectives relevant to incident
response related to PII.
Methodology
To identify resources, policies, and procedures relevant to our audit objectives, we interviewed
the following personnel:
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 17
• EIS State Chief Information Officer;
• EIS Cybersecurity management;
• EIS CDO;
• DOJ Assistant Attorneys General;
• Legislative Policy and Research Office analyst; and
• Compliance, technology, and security personnel at select agencies.
We also sent a survey to 20 judgmentally selected agencies to gain an understanding of the
people and processes in place to manage data privacy risks at the agency level.
We inspected the following documents:
• Oregon Revised Statutes and Administrative Rules relevant to data privacy, incident
response, and personally identifiable information;
• House Bill 3361 as enrolled by the Oregon Legislature in the 2017 Regular Session;
• Policies, procedures, and other materials provided by a selection of Oregon state agencies
that are relevant to data privacy; and
• Statewide information security policies, procedures, and training materials.
To identify leading practices related to our audit objectives, we inspected the following
documents:
• Federal laws and regulations relevant to data privacy;
• Federal privacy and data governance program materials; and
• Policies and procedures and governance structures established in other states that are
relevant to data privacy, incident response, and personally identifiable information.
To identify generally accepted control objectives and practices for information systems, we used
the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) Security and Privacy Controls for
Federal Information Systems and Organizations and their Privacy Framework, the ISACA
publication COBIT 2019 Framework – Governance and Management Objectives, and the United
States Government Accountability Office’s publication “Federal Information System Controls
Audit Manual” (FISCAM).  For internal control standards, auditors relied on “Standards for
Internal Control in the Federal Government” published by the U.S. Government Accountability
Office.
The map graphic used in this report for Figure 4 is used with the permission of the IAPP.10 Data
displayed in Figure 6 is used with the permission of Ponemon Institute; the research conducted
by Ponemon Institute was sponsored by IBM Security.
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis
for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We sincerely appreciate the courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of
DAS, EIS, and other agencies during the course of this audit.
10 The source article and image can be found on IAPP’s website at https://iapp.org/resources/article/state-comparison-table/.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 18
Appendix A: Definitions
Data Breach – Compromise of security that leads to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss,
alteration, unauthorized disclosure of, or access to, protected data transmitted, stored or
otherwise processed.
Data Lifecycle – The stages through which data passes, typically characterized as creation or
collection, processing, dissemination, use, storage, and disposition, to include destruction and
deletion.
Data Privacy – There are many definitions of privacy, including “The right of a party to maintain
control over and confidentiality of information about itself.”
Information Security – The protection of information and information systems from
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide
confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Information Security Event (as defined by EIS statewide policy) – An observable,
measurable occurrence in respect to an information asset that is a deviation from normal
operations.
Information Security Incident (as defined by EIS statewide policy) – A single or a series of
unwanted or unexpected information security events that result in harm, or pose a significant
threat of harm to information assets and require non-routine or preventative or corrective
action.
Incident Response – The mitigation of violations of security policies and recommended
practices.
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) – Any information that (a) can be used to establish a
link between the information and the natural person to whom such information relates, or (b) is
or can be directly or indirectly linked to a natural person. A natural person being the person to
whom the PII relates.
Personal Information (as defined in ORS 646A.602)
(12)(a) “Personal information” means:
(A) A consumer’s first name or first initial and last name in combination with any one or
more of the following data elements, if encryption, redaction or other methods have not
rendered the data elements unusable or if the data elements are encrypted and the encryption
key has been acquired:
(i) A consumer’s Social Security number;
(ii) A consumer’s driver license number or state identification card number issued by the
Department of Transportation;
(iii) A consumer’s passport number or other identification number issued by the United
States;
(iv) A consumer’s financial account number, credit card number or debit card number, in
combination with any required security code, access code or password that would permit access
to a consumer’s financial account, or any other information or combination of information that a
person reasonably knows or should know would permit access to the consumer’s financial
account;
(v) Data from automatic measurements of a consumer’s physical characteristics, such as an
image of a fingerprint, retina or iris, that are used to authenticate the consumer’s identity in the
course of a financial transaction or other transaction;
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2020-37 | November 2020 | Page 19
(vi) A consumer’s health insurance policy number or health insurance subscriber
identification number in combination with any other unique identifier that a health insurer uses
to identify the consumer; or
(vii) Any information about a consumer’s medical history or mental or physical condition or
about a health care professional’s medical diagnosis or treatment of the consumer.
(B) A username or other means of identifying a consumer for the purpose of permitting
access to the consumer’s account, together with any other method necessary to authenticate the
username or means of identification.
(C) Any of the data elements or any combination of the data elements described in
subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph without the consumer’s username, or the consumer’s
first name or first initial and last name, if:
(i) Encryption, redaction or other methods have not rendered the data element or
combination of data elements unusable; and
(ii) The data element or combination of data elements would enable a person to commit
identity theft against a consumer.
(b) “Personal information” does not include information in a federal, state or local
government record, other than a Social Security number, that is lawfully made available to the
public.
Kate Brown, Governor
November 12, 2020
Kip Memmott, Director
Secretary of State, Audits Division
255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Salem, OR 97310
Dear Mr. Memmott,
T
his letter provides a written response to the Audits Division’s final draft audit report titled: The
State Does Not Have a Privacy Program to Manage Enterprise Data Privacy Risk.
T
hank you for providing Enterprise Information Services (EIS) the audit report. We appreciate
the work and collaborative approach of the Audits Division staff. We look forward to working
on our response to the recommendation to enhance our commitment to improvement.
T
he State of Oregon information technology teams are decentralized. The systems are complex
and retain information that require each agency to safeguard in accordance with many
different entities.  EIS submitted a Legislative Concept (LC) to establish a Chief Privacy Officer
and staff. Should the LC continue to move forward and ultimately funded, EIS would begin to
build an appropriate program in support of privacy overall. This concept is still in the approval
process.
B
elow is our detailed response to each recommendation in the audit.
RECOMMENDATION 1
1. Request funding to establish a statewide privacy office and appoint a Chief Privacy
Officer, or similar role, whose position will have the authority, mission,
accountability, and resources to coordinate and develop statewide privacy
requirements. Charge the CPO with the following tasks:
a. D
evelop a strategic plan and timeline for coordinating an enterprise privacy
risk assessment, developing statewide policies and procedures to manage
and monitor privacy risk, and providing privacy training to agency personnel
and third parties engaged in data processing;
Department of Administrative Services
Office of the Chief Operating Officer
155 Cottage Street NE
Salem, OR 97301
PHONE: 503-378-3104
FAX: 503-373-7643
`
November 12, 2020
b. Work with other state officials as necessary to ensure roles for responding to
incidents involving PII are clearly and consistently articulated in statewide
policies, procedures, and plans; and
c. Once roles are clearly established, work with other state officials as
necessary to ensure incident response training is provided to agency
personnel consistent with assigned roles and responsibilities.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree
2023
Terrence Woods
971-707-0233
Narrative for Recommendation 1
EIS agrees with the recommendation and is prepared to move forward if the Legislative
Concept is eventually approved and funded. The target date will need to adjust depending on
approval and availability of funds.
Please contact Lisa Upshaw, DAS Chief Audit Executive at 971-719-3114 with any questions.
Sincerely,
Terrence Woods
State Chief Information Officer
cc: Lisa Upshaw
Kathryn Helms
Jennifer Bjerke
Gary Johnson
Audit Team
Teresa Furnish, CISA, Audit Manager
Ian Green, M. Econ, CGAP, CFE, CISA, Audit Manager
Jessica Ritter, CPA, CISA, Senior Auditor
Sheila Faulkner, Staff Auditor
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of Public
Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected Secretary of State and is
independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon government.
The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards and commissions as well as
administer municipal audit law.
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500 | Salem | OR | 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits