Secretary of State
Oregon Audits Division
2021-22
Audit Plan
Shemia Fagan, Secretary of State
Kip Memmott, Audits Director
Table of
Contents
Letter from the Secretary of State
Welcome to the Annual Audit Plan
Letter from the Audits Director
What to expect for this year’s audit listing
Overview of the Annual Audit Plan
How our risk assessment works
About the Audits Division
How we are uniquely structured as an audit function
Audit Portfolios and Strategies
Our strengths, skills, and goals
Performance Audits
Assessing the efficiency of agency operations
Information Technology Audits
Cybersecurity and information systems
Other Division Projects
Data analytics and our other portfolios
Financial Audits
Accounting for public monies
Letter from the
Secretary of State
February 2021
Long before the pandemic upended our everyday lives, Oregon faced a number of ongoing crises,
affecting the lives of people in every community across the state. Too many Oregonians are unjustly
burdened by systemic racism and the generational inequities that follow. Climate change threatens
our very way of life, and our housing crisis affects the stability of families across Oregon. In 2020,
unprecedented wildfires, COVID-19, and the resulting economic downturn only intensified the
existing inequities burdening Oregonians in under-resourced regions and historically marginalized
communities.
The Secretary of State’s Audits Division plays a key role in making sure our state’s resources have the
biggest impact in the lives of Oregonians. I am so humbled to lead the incredible team in the division
in tackling some of the most pressing issues bearing down on Oregon. Under the expert direction of
our professional, nonpartisan auditors, the 2021-22 Audit Plan includes:
• An analysis of Oregon’s Unemployment Insurance Program, identifying the challenges the program faced early in the
pandemic and working to ensure the system will be resilient in the face of a future crisis.
• An evaluation of the emergency response to the 2020 wildfires and recommendations for improvements in natural
disaster responses in the future.
• An audit of our state’s COVID-19 vaccine distribution to ensure we are efficiently and equitably immunizing Oregonians
while stopping the spread of this deadly virus.
• An inspection of rural water supplies and the environmental and contamination risks faced now and in the future.
• A look at domestic terrorism and ideologically motivated violent extremism in Oregon and law enforcement’s ability to
deal with the threat.
• An assessment of the licensing and regulation of cannabis businesses and evaluation of how licensing can be used to right
historical wrongs to Black, Indigenous, and people of color communities.
• An overview of the types of calls received by state and local 911 systems and an equitable analysis of what and how public
safety resources are deployed in response.
• An assessment of the state of cybersecurity in Oregon and determination of whether state agencies and local governments
have effective and efficient information technology security frameworks and control structures.
• An analysis of the performance of Oregon’s mortgage interest deduction and a risk assessment of homeless services to
determine how to improve coordinating and distributing services.
The work of this audit plan would not be possible without Audits Director Kip Memmott, the talented auditors within the
division and the ongoing collaboration between the Oregon State Legislature, the Joint Legislative Audits Committee,
Governor Kate Brown, and the dedicated officials who run agencies throughout our state. I thank them for their steadfast
commitment to improving the work we do to serve the people of Oregon.
In the coming months, we will seek statewide engagement and prioritize community outreach in order to hear from Oregonians
impacted by the risks identified in this audit plan. Please speak up. Please share your experience. I want to know your story
because every voice, every experience, and every person’s needs matter. Y our experience should impact how decisions are
made in this great state we all call home.
Sincerely,
Shemia Fagan
Secretary of State
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 3
I am excited to present the Oregon Secretary of State’s 2021-22 Audit Plan. The audit plan
reflects Secretary Fagan’s and the Audits Division team’s commitment to using our skills and
resources to execute high-impact audits examining government functions and services that
are most relevant to the people who reside in our great state, especially those most vulnerable
among us. These audits are designed to ensure transparency of government operations and to
help to build and maintain public trust.
The purpose of the audit plan is to identify agencies, programs, entities receiving state monies,
and operational areas to be examined by the Audits Division. The 2021-22 Audit Plan includes
a range of diverse performance, financial, and information technology audits focused on
critical areas of public concern, including: risks related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic;
increasing threats to public safety posed by domestic terrorism and violent extremism; and emergency management
response challenges and lessons learned from the devastating 2020 wildfire season.
The plan highlights our innovative auditing techniques designed to maximize audit impact and value. These
techniques include real-time and assurance auditing, data analytics, cybersecurity audits, equity auditing, and the
division’s recommendation follow-up program.
The risk assessment approach utilized to develop this plan is described herein. Our risk assessment methodology is
focused on obtaining input and suggestions from key stakeholders, including the Governor’s Office, legislators, state
agency leadership, state employees — including Audits Division auditors — and members of the community. Under
Secretary Fagan’s vision, the Audits Division will be expanding outreach efforts to community groups.
I want to thank the Governor’s Office, agency leaders, and legislators, especially members of the Joint Legislative
Audit Committee, for their ongoing support, cooperation, and collaboration with the Audits Division. This spirit of
support and collaboration was especially strong during 2020, despite the devastating effects of the pandemic and
wildfires on the state.
I want to thank Secretary Fagan for her vision moving ahead and for her support of our team. I want to thank the
Audits Division team for their amazing resiliency and commitment to excellence and public service. The division
team produced a high volume of impactful work despite the impacts of the pandemic on their personal lives,
including working in a full-time telework model since March 2020. It is truly an honor and a privilege to serve with
this team.
Most importantly, I want to thank Oregonians. This plan is designed with their interests and needs in mind and I am
confident these audits will help to improve the lives of people.
Respectfully,
Kip Memmott
Audits Division Director
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 4
Letter from the
Audits Director
February 2021
Overview of the
Annual Audit Plan
The mission of the Oregon Audits Division is to protect the public interest and improve Oregon government. A key
component of this mission is the division’s annual audit plan, which lists the agencies, programs, and topics that are
prioritized for audits in the coming year.
The annual audit plan demonstrates two key philosophies of the Audits Division: our commitment to transparency
and our emphasis on being agile and responsive to critical issues facing the state. We are committed to completing
the audits listed in the plan; however, our risk assessment process is continuous. The plan is a flexible document and
we will redirect audit resources as necessary to address critical issues facing the state.
Preparing the Audit Plan
We select and prioritize audits using a risk-assessment approach. Our risk assessment is based on specific risk factors
related to the quality of internal controls and the liability and level of exposure to the state of various agencies,
programs, or activities.
This risk assessment considers the following factors:
• The direction of the elected Secretary of State;
• Industry-standard risk assessment criteria;
• Previous audits of agency operations and internal controls;
• Trend analyses to identify recurring audit findings and control
deficiencies;
• Audit follow-up and recommendation tracking;
• The state’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports (CAFRs),
Single Audit Reports, and audit management letters;
• Input from elected officials, including the Governor’s Office
and members of the Joint Legislative Audit Committee
(JLAC);
• Input from agency management, other public sector audit
organizations, and members of the public;
• Priorities and work products of other leading government audit
functions;
• Topics informed and suggested by research conducted by
Audits Division staff;
• Current events and trends, financial conditions, and public
policy issues, including emerging policy; and
• Equity, inclusion, and diversity risks and frameworks.
This risk assessment process allows us to efficiently allocate our limited resources; provides a flexible mechanism for
managing competing needs; limits the potential for duplicate and overlapping work with other audit functions; and
provides a foundation to obtain sufficient resources required to execute our mission.
The annual audit plan includes a list of the performance, financial, and information technology (IT) audits we plan to
conduct in the coming year. The plan also describes ongoing initiatives that improve upon our audit work, including
our data analytics portfolio and recommendation follow-up program.
Risk Assessment Criteria
The Audits Division considers the following
risk factors when developing the audit plan:
• Size of audited agency or program
• Compliance and regulations
• Pending or recent legislation
• Complexity of transactions
• Fiscal sustainability
• Management accountability
• Quality of internal control system
• Age of program or operation
• Audit history
• Public health and safety
• Critical infrastructure
• Short- and long-term strategic risks
• Related litigation and relevant case law
• Emerging risk areas
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 5
The Audits Division conducts audits to protect the public interest and improve Oregon government. We ensure
that public funds are properly accounted for, spent in accordance with legal requirements, and used to the best
advantage. These efforts help accomplish the Secretary of State’s vision to deliver better results for Oregonians
through greater accountability and transparency and to promote more efficient and effective service delivery.
The Audits Division and the Secretary of State, as Auditor of Public Accounts, operate under the authority of the
Oregon Constitution, Article VI, section 2, and ORS 297.010 through 297.990.
The division adheres to a high-impact, value-add auditing strategy based on a collaborative model, innovation,
continuous improvement activities, and public interest reporting. We direct our audit efforts to those areas of
government that can most benefit from an independent assessment of the management of public funds and the
results achieved. We strive to provide transparency to Oregonians to maintain the public trust. We accomplish this
by adhering to Government Auditing Standards, recruiting and retaining a highly qualified audit staff, deploying
sophisticated and innovative audit methodologies and tools, and establishing and maintaining open and positive
communications with key stakeholders, including elected officials and agency leadership.
The division has three overarching goals:
About the
Audits Division
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 6
Be seen as the public’s agent for good government.
• Communicate to Oregonians our efforts to improve their government
• Communicate results in a way that engages and helps our stakeholders
• Follow up and report on actions taken by agencies in response to our audits
• Obtain state and national recognition of Oregon audits
• Address and deter fraud, waste, and abuse through calls to our hotline and
promote hotline activities and results
Audit within a performance management framework.
• Expand the professional capabilities of our auditors
• Continually improve in-house training for audit staff
• Empower audit teams to develop improved audit methods
• Methodically identify audit topics that deliver the greatest benefits
• Increase teamwork about roles, audit ideas, methods, and findings
• Sustain and enhance tools, data access, resources, and authority to audit
• Continuously improve efforts for timely, efficient, quality audits
Work to improve government decisions and performance.
• Audit the performance of Oregon government for ways to improve it
• Provide timely, quality financial assurance services
• Conduct compliance and internal control audits of key risk areas
• Audit information technology processes, controls, and governance
• Directly communicate the results of our work to other branches of state
government
• Monitor the financial condition of the state and selected local governments
• Monitor the municipal audit function in the state
Ensuring that audit work is conducted independently, objectively, and accurately is fundamental to the integrity and
value of auditing. In order to ensure that all the division’s work meets these requirements and in compliance with
statute, we follow Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS). The division has implemented
a robust and consistent audit process and a system of procedures, including extensive quality assurance activities,
to ensure our audit work not only meets, but exceeds, auditing standards. GAGAS require 40 hours of annual
continuing professional education for auditors. We strive to ensure this training equips our audit staff with the latest
and best skills and aids in their professional development.
A key standard requires that the division undergo an external quality assurance (peer) review every three years.
These reviews include detailed inspections of the division’s policies, procedures, processes, reports, and supporting
workpapers to ensure they comply with standards. The division participates in the National State Auditors
Association (NSAA) peer review program and has undergone external peer reviews for many years. We consistently
receive opinions of full compliance with these standards. The division’s last external peer review was completed in
May 2019 with the next review scheduled for May 2022.
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 7
Legal Audit Model Framework
Both statute and the State Constitution authorize the Secretary of State’s Office to conduct audits of state
government and other specified public entities. Several key components serve as the cornerstone for the Secretary
of State audit model.
The statutory requirement for the Secretary of State’s Office to comply with standards, combined with other key
components making up the model’s framework, ensure that Oregon has one of the most structurally independent
government audit functions in the country.
Elected Secretary
The Secretary of State
is an elected official
who leads the office
independently from other
elected officials and state
operational management.
Comprehensive
Access
The State Constitution
authorizes the Secretary
of State to have access
to all officers, employees,
records, and property
maintained by the State
and to all external entities,
records, and personnel
related to their business
interactions with the
State.
Adherence to
Professional Audit
Standards
The Audits Division
conducts all audits in
accordance with Generally
Accepted Government
Auditing Standards
(GAGAS) promulgated
by the United States
Comptroller General.
Joint Legislative
Audit Committee
The Secretary of State
works closely with the
Joint Legislative Audit
Committee (JLAC)
to communicate audit
results and to ensure
optimal audit impact.
ORS 171.585 establishes
JLAC as a core
legislative committee
whose responsibility is
to “select audit reports
for review and make
recommendations for
change.”
The division is comprised of 70 professional audit staff and two administrative support staff. Professional staff include
financial, performance, and information technology auditors. Division staff possess diverse academic backgrounds,
professional experience, and skill sets. Many auditors have obtained graduate degrees and professional certifications.
The division maintains several specialty positions, including a data analytics manager and a communications
specialist.
The division’s core work portfolios include the following:
Performance Auditing
The plan reflects a strong emphasis on one of our strengths — performance auditing, particularly in the areas of
program effectiveness and assessing the efficiency of various state agencies and programs.
The performance audits included in this year’s plan reflect many of the emerging risks facing Oregon as well as the
nation: COVID-19 vaccination distribution, domestic terrorism and violent extremism, and emergency response to
natural disasters such as wildfire.
We have also identified several audits that affect key populations and policies that are important to Oregonians. For
instance, this year’s plan includes an audit of cannabis licensing and enforcement and an audit examining the risks to
the economic sustainability and viability of Oregon’s community colleges.
Financial Auditing
The audit plan leverages the long-standing professionalism and institutional knowledge of our staff with audit work
covering the financial condition, accounting, and management activities of the state.
A primary responsibility of the Audits Division is to conduct financial audits. Financial audits provide assurance as
to whether a state agency has followed generally accepted accounting principles in preparing its financial records
and financial statements. Financial audits help ensure state agency financial statements and the amounts presented
therein are materially complete and accurate.
The division annually audits the state’s financial statements and federal programs at state agencies to ensure
agencies are complying with financial reporting and federal program requirements.
The largest financial audit we conduct is the annual Statewide Single Audit, which incorporates an audit of the state’s
financial statements included in the state’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. It also includes an audit of the
state’s internal controls and compliance with federal program requirements.
We perform the single audit to satisfy the Legislature, the Governor, and the public that the state’s financial
statements are presented fairly and that significant deficiencies in its fiscal systems are identified and corrected. We
also conduct this audit to fulfill the federal government’s mandate to audit the administration and use of more than
$12 billion in federal monies provided to Oregon each year.
The Audits Division also administers Municipal Audit Law, which requires Oregon’s local governments to submit
annual financial reports to the Secretary of State. In the interest of transparency and accountability, we assist
with understanding and complying with the law and making information available to the public about the financial
condition of municipalities.
Audit Portfolios and
Strategies
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 8
IT and Cybersecurity Auditing
The audit plan addresses the ongoing risks associated with IT and cybersecurity with a strong emphasis on IT audits, a
specialized type of performance audits.
One of these audits will have a special focus on digital equity by evaluating statewide access to broadband internet —
something that has increased importance during the COVID pandemic as more Oregonians work and go to school
online from home.
Additionally, the audit plan includes our ongoing cybersecurity controls assessment program, wherein we focus
narrowly on a set of IT controls related to cybersecurity — an area that continues to pose a high threat not only to
the state of Oregon, but nationwide.
Equity Auditing
As with prior audit plans, this year’s plan includes audits with equity audit objectives. In alignment with Secretary
Fagan’s vision, this year’s plan increases our focus on equity as a primary objective for our audits.
Government entities are constitutionally required to treat all citizens equally. The provision of government services
and the quality of such services should be consistent regardless of ethnicity, income, or other human differences.
This also applies to government regulatory and enforcement actions.
The division has experience in auditing with equity objectives, but this year’s plan further bolsters our work in this
area. Many of our audits will include a special focus on equity. One such audit will assess the efficacy of the home
mortgage interest deduction at the Department of Revenue.
Leading Practice Audit Methodologies and Data Analytics
We are proud to report the Audits Division continues to serve as a leader in pioneering innovative audit
methodologies to further improve upon our audit work. To better streamline and build upon our data analytics
capabilities, we now have an audit manager tasked with this portfolio.
Data analytics is the process of inspecting, cleansing, transforming, and modeling data with the goal of discovering
useful information, informing conclusions, and supporting decision-making.
Our work in this area has already drawn national attention —we are the first audit shop to engage with the U.S.
Treasury’s Do Not Pay program to conduct data matching and reduce improper payments in Oregon’s Medicaid
program. This year’s audit plan outlines several potential projects that take advantage of our data analytics
capabilities to further innovate our work and optimize our efforts to auditing equity.
Real-time Auditing
In alignment with our strategic focus on being timely and responsive, the division will continue conducting real-time
audits. Real-time auditing focuses on evaluating front-end strategic planning, service delivery processes, controls,
and performance measurement frameworks before or at the onset of program or policy implementations by state
agencies.
A common critique is that audits do not provide timely information. Auditors can be perceived as providing
information on issues that have already been identified and as providing information too late to prevent negative and
costly outcomes. This is especially the case for large-scale state projects and expenditures. Real-time auditing seeks
to avoid this problem.
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 9
Assurance-based Auditing
In alignment with our strategy based upon transparency, accountability, and public education, we will include
assurance-based findings in our audit reports, when possible.
In addition to identifying issues and problems with government operations, the division believes we have a
responsibility to report on government effectiveness and successes, based on audit evidence. This approach helps to
enhance collaborative relationships with audited entities and build public trust in government.
Assurance-based auditing is commonplace in the private sector as executive management and stockholders want
to know what is working and what is not working within their organizations. This allows them to execute effective
strategic planning and better prioritize resources. We intend to have the same effect with our approach.
Audit Follow-up Program
Our improved audit follow-up program includes more in-depth audit work to verify that appropriate and timely
corrective actions have been taken to address prior audit findings and mitigate identified risks. This work culminates
in the issuance of formal audit follow-up reports. To better prioritize audit resources, we have adopted a risk-based
approach in determining which audit recommendations require follow-up work.
From 2019 to 2020, the division issued 15 reports following up on the progress of implementing recommendations
made in prior years, including recommendations on child safety and foster care at the Department of Human
Services and efforts at the Office of Emergency Management to prepare for a catastrophic disaster.
Audited entities have agreed with approximately 96% of the audit recommendations included in our large and
diverse performance and IT audit portfolio over the last four years.
Hotline Administration and Anti-Fraud Focus
The division administers the State’s Fraud, Waste and Abuse Hotline. The Government Waste Hotline was
established in 1995 for public employees and members of the public to report waste, inefficiency or abuse by state
agencies, state employees, or persons under contract with state agencies.
We have enhanced our approach and staffing for administering the hotline. These changes improved its effectiveness
and allowed us to be more efficient and nimbler in responding to hotline complaints, further strengthening our anti-
fraud focus.
In addition to assessing fraud risk, audits in the plan will have objectives assessing the effectiveness of internal
controls established by management to detect and prevent fraud. By highlighting potential gaps within internal
control systems, the opportunity for fraud can be reduced.
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 10
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
COVID-19
Vaccination
Distribution Efficacy
Oregon Health
Authority, County
Public Health
Agencies
The purpose of this audit is to examine the effectiveness and
efficacy of how the state of Oregon and local governments
communicate information about and distribute COVID-19
vaccinations, as well as an assessment of internal controls in
place to monitor the public health outcomes from the vaccines.
This audit may examine how Black, Indigenous, and people of
color (BIPOC) and the nine federally recognized tribes, and
communities of color across Oregon, experience disproportional
rates of infection. High-risk populations may also be examined.
This audit may also consider language barriers and their impact.
While not anticipated as a real-time audit, the audit will be timed,
in consultation with OHA, to focus on the second and third phases
of vaccination. The audit may include a review of the Phase 1 trial
from a lessons learned perspective and leverage prior division-
related work, including a collaborative advisory project with DHS
and OHA examining ongoing risks to the state's long term care
facilities.
Domestic Terrorism
and Violent Extremism
Risk Mitigation
Oregon State
Police, Oregon
Department of
Justice
The purpose of this audit is to examine state responsibilities,
expenditures, and coordination with federal and other partners
to identify and address public safety risks posed by domestic
terrorism and violent extremism. This audit may consider groups
targeted by domestic terrorism and violent extremism. This
audit may examine if responses are culturally specific and if
responsiveness is equitable across all populations. While not
anticipated to be a component of the audit, the Oregon Military
Department's roles and responsibilities related to the National
Guard will likely be reviewed.
Effectiveness and
Equity of Cannabis
Licensing and
Compliance
Oregon Liquor
and Control
Commission
This audit will examine OLCC regulatory oversight of the Oregon
cannabis industry. Audit objectives may include examining the
effectiveness and equity of OLCC licensing, compliance, and
enforcement actions. The audit will likely make recommendations
for the structure and resources needed to ensure an effective
licensing and compliance system that supports equitable business
growth. This audit may also use available disaggregated data
regarding disproportional impacts. This audit may also consider
BIPOC- and tribal-owned businesses vs. venture capital
ownership.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Performance Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 11
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Emergency
Management
Coordination
Statewide
The purpose of this audit is to assess how the State of Oregon
governed its response to the COVID-19 pandemic and 2020
wildfires and the challenges posed by the spread of disinformation
and misinformation. The audit will likely review After Action
Reports (AARs) to identify ongoing risks and opportunities and
to identify areas that went well to reinforce public trust. This
audit builds upon previous emergency management audits that
documented significant risks to the state's response system. The
short- and long-term mental health impacts and mitigation efforts
for front line workers, first responders, as well as the affected
communities and families, may be taken into consideration. This
audit may examine the utilizations of community-based resources
and if systems are culturally responsive and impacts that may be
disproportionate among different communities.
Higher Education
Sustainability
Higher Education
Coordinating
Commission,
Selected
Community
Colleges
This audit will examine risks to the economic sustainability and
viability of the state community colleges and include the effects
of pandemic-related impacts to nontraditional access. An audit
of state universities is on the horizon. This audit may review the
Oregon Promise program, Career Technical Education (CTE),
and available disaggregated data comparing prior enrollment to
current. The impact of COVID-19 may be a focus of this audit.
Home Mortgage
Interest Deduction
Policy Efficacy
Department of
Revenue
This audit will examine the efficacy and impacts of the statutory
mortgage interest deduction and determine the impact of multiple
residence deductions by an individual in the same calendar year
and the impact of these benefits for those above certain income
thresholds.
Oregon Medicaid
Program
Oregon Health
Authority
The purpose of this audit is to identify opportunities to maximize
resources allocated for the state's Medicaid program with the
intent of identifying any areas of waste so that these funds can
be prioritized to ensure positive health outcomes for Medicaid
enrollees. This audit may also consider whether Medicaid
enrollment disproportionately benefits any particular community
over another.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Performance Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 12
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Rural Water Resources
Access, Quality, and
Sustainability
Department
of Agriculture,
Oregon Water
Resources
Department,
Oregon Watershed
Enhancement
Board, Oregon
Department of Fish
and Wildlife
This audit will examine risks to the access, quality, and
sustainability of rural area water resources.
9-1-1 Response
Program Equity
Office of
Emergency
Management,
Department of
Revenue, Oregon
State Police, Local
9-1-1 Call Centers
The purpose of this audit is to assess the costs, effectiveness,
and equitable application of resources of the State 9-1-1
communication system and the dispatched responses. Utilizing
our data analytics capabilities and disaggregated data to determine
disproportionate impacts, this audit may analyze 9-1-1 call types
and dispatch response practices. A primary focus of the audit,
aligned with the division's focus on social justice, is to identify
opportunities for the state to enhance the effectiveness and
efficacy of the program based on emergent leading practices,
including a review of the CAHOOTS program being administered
by the City of Eugene. This includes determining if current
responding agencies are the most appropriate, effective, and
equitable based on the type of emergency. This may also include
identifying barriers to access and what areas are lacking 911 access.
This audit may include a review of the controls and outcomes for
the Emergency Communications Tax. This tax amount increased
on January 1, 2020. The division may leverage related work being
conducted for the audit examining the state's emergency response
system.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Performance Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 13
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 14
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Cybersecurity Audits
Department of
Veterans Affairs,
Department of
Consumer and
Business Services
The purpose of these audits is to determine whether state agencies
have effective and efficient information technology security
frameworks and control structures.
Evaluation of Access
to Broadband Internet
Access and Digital
Equity
Business Oregon
This audit will review policies and statutes related to high-speed
internet access to identify opportunities to remove barriers to
expansion into rural and other communities that experience
challenges accessing reliable and affordable broadband services.
Oregon's
Unemployment
Insurance Program
Oregon
Employment
Department
This will be an audit to examine root causes for the substantive
risks and performance issues related to the state's Unemployment
Insurance Program that arose during the COVID-19 pandemic.
TEAMS Application
Controls
Oregon
Department of
Transportation
This audit will assess the controls in place to protect the
confidentiality, availability, and integrity of ODOT's financial
information.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Information Technology Audits
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Audit Follow-Up Statewide The division is enhancing our audit follow-up program to be more
efficient and impactful by adopting a risk-based approach.
Data Analytics
Portfolio Statewide
The division is nationally renowned for our impactful and innovative
data analytics work. The division established a formal data analytics
portfolio under the lead of a credentialed and experienced audit
manager. We will continue to implement the data analytics
portfolio and will have a strategic document outlining the
governance and key outcomes for this portfolio. It will be critical
for us to secure key state datasets efficiently and effectively from
state agencies.
Homeless Services
Risk Assessment Statewide
This risk assessment will map efforts to address homelessness in
Oregon with the intent of identifying a multi-year audit approach
to address the issue systemically. This audit will consider equity
in all aspects. This audit may examine how BIPOC and the nine
federally recognized tribes, and communities of color across
Oregon, experience access to services and whether there is
disproportionate access.
Information
System Controls
Documentation Audit
Standards Project
Statewide
Audit standards require all audit teams to obtain an understanding
of the controls relevant to the audit objectives and determine any
audit steps needed to test the relevant controls. Our IT auditors
have a specialized skill set that can be leveraged to provide support
for all audit projects by obtaining and documenting IT general
controls.
Measure 110 and
Substance Use
Disorder Risk
Assessment
Statewide
This risk assessment will map the state's policy, governance
structure, and resources to determine the effectiveness of state
programs to address substance use disorder risks.
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 15
2021-22 Audit Plan
Other Division Projects
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Statewide Single
Audit: Part One,
Financial
Statewide
A single audit is required by the federal government to receive
federal financial assistance and has two main components, the first
being an audit of the State’s financial statements and reporting on
the schedule of expenditures of federal awards (SEFA) in relation
to those financial statements. Based on prior year audits, the FY21
audit will most likely include audit procedures at the following
agencies:
Department of Administrative Services
Department of Consumer and Business Services
Oregon Business Development Department
Department of Corrections
Department of Education
Oregon Employment Department
Department of Environmental Quality
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
Oregon Department of Forestry
Oregon Health Authority
Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Department of Human Services
Oregon Judicial Department
Department of Justice
Oregon Liquor Control Commission
Oregon Military Department
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
Public Defense Services Commission
Department of Revenue
Oregon Department of Transportation
The FY21 audit will also include financial statement audits at the
following agencies.
Oregon Housing and Community Services
Oregon State Lottery
Oregon Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Public Employees Retirement System*
State Accident Insurance Fund*
Common School Fund at the Department of State Lands*
*Indicates audits that we contract with CPA firms to conduct.
Statewide Single
Audit: Part Two,
Federal
Statewide
The second component is a compliance audit of major federal
awards expended during the fiscal year. During the planning phase
of the FY21 audit, we will determine the federal programs to audit.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Financial Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 16
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Financial Statement Oregon State
Treasury
FY21 Oregon Short-Term
FY21 Oregon Local Government Investment Fund
FY21 Oregon Intermediate Term Pool
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported.
FY21 Financial
Statement and
Compliance
Department of
Consumer and
Business Services,
Oregon Health
Insurance
Marketplace
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported. In addition, to verify compliance with
programmatic requirements set forth by 45 CFR part 155; report
on compliance as directed by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS); and meet requirements of a performance audit as
directed in ORS 741.220.
FY20 Financial
Statement
Oregon Business
Development
Department,
Special Public Works
Fund and Water
Fund
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported.
FY20 Financial
Statement
Oregon Department
of Energy,
Small Scale Energy
Loan Program
(SELP)
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported.
FY21 Financial
Statement
Columbia River
Gorge
Commission
In accordance with the Interstate Cooperative Agreement between
the Washington State Auditor’s office and the Oregon Secretary
of State Audits Division, we perform procedures to verify
Oregon’s share of the Columbia River Gorge Commission’s joint
expenditures and commissioners’ compensation are in compliance
with laws and regulations of the State of Oregon.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Financial Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 17
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
FY20 Financial
Statement
Department of
Environmental
Quality,
Clean Water
Revolving Fund
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported.
FY20 Financial
Statement
Oregon Department
of Education,
High School
Graduation and
College and Career
Readiness Fund
To review internal accounting and compliance control procedures
and to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the amounts
reported in the financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported.
Federal
Compliance Various This interim audit work supports the FY21 Statewide Single Audit.
Financial
Department of
Administrative
Services,
Oregon State
Payroll Application
and Statewide
Financial
Management
Application
This interim audit work supports the FY21 Statewide Single Audit.
Statewide Summary
Single Audit Various
Keeping the State of Oregon Accountable: To summarize and issue
a summary report on the results of the FY20 Statewide Single
Audit financial and federal audits.
Municipal Audit Local governments
ORS 297.405 to 297.740 and 297.990 (Municipal Audit Law)
require local governments, including counties, cities, school
districts, and special districts, to prepare and submit annual reports.
Our annual report summarizes the financial reporting activities of
Oregon’s municipal corporations for the prior fiscal year.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Financial Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 18
Audit Topic Entity(ies) Potential Scope and Objectives
Federal Pandemic
Fund Transparency
and Utilization
Statewide
The purpose of this audit is to provide assurance and identify risks
related to the state's use of federal pandemic funds including
CARES Act funding.
Inventory and
Purchasing Controls
Risk Assessment
Oregon Department
of Transportation
This limited scope audit will review ODOT's recent work to
enhance the department's inventory systems.
Wildfire Contracts Oregon Department
of Transportation
This audit examining wildfire contracts to third-party providers
would be a joint audit conducted with ODOT's internal audit team.
Risk Assessments
and Fiscal Resource
Reviews
Various To review agency records and programs to identify fiscal and
program risks.
2021-22 Audit Plan
Financial Audits
Oregon Secretary of State Audit Plan | February 2021 | page 19
Secretary of State
Oregon Audits Division
This Annual Audit Plan was prepared and designed by:
Shemia Fagan, Secretary of State
Kip Memmott, Audits Director
Mary Wenger, Deputy Audits Director
Laura Fosmire, Communications Specialist
Julie Sparks, Office Manager
Icons are courtesy of Freepik via Flaticon.com. All rights reserved.