Advisory Report
ODOT Worked Quickly to Oversee the Largest
Wildfire Debris Removal Operation in State History
October 2021
Report 2021-30
Source: ODOT
On August 20, 2020, Oregon Governor Kate Brown declared a statewide state of
emergency due to the imminent threat of wildfire. Within weeks of the declaration, a
significant windstorm triggered a series of catastrophic wildfires, known generally as
the Labor Day fires, that burned across significant portions of the state.
This was the biggest and most expensive emergency disaster event in Oregon
history, and the state had never before undertaken such a widespread and complex
recovery effort. The wildfires burned over 1.2 million acres and affected multiple
counties. Eight of these counties were approved for Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) Public Assistance to help with debris removal. The cost
alone for the cleanup of household hazardous waste, hazardous trees, ash, and
other debris to safely access and rebuild homes and communities was initially
estimated at $622 million. Work is estimated to be completed in Summer 2022.
A newly formed Oregon Debris Management Task Force coordinated debris removal,
and Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) led the removal operations. This
was the first time ODOT conducted major debris removal operations, a key part of
the state’s wildfire recovery efforts.
At the request of ODOT, we performed a limited, review of its hazardous tree
removal operations due to public concerns over the extent of trees tagged and cut
down in the fire corridors.
This report was produced to provide real-time information on recovery operations
underway. It has undergone the same quality assurance process as audit reports
from the Oregon Audits Division.
Continued on next page
By the Numbers
Oregon’s wildfire recovery
operation
state highway miles to clear
of hazards
93,259
damaged trees inspected as
of August 19, 2021
62,042
trees cut as of August 19,
2021
3,080
lots enrolled for private
property cleanup as of
September 29, 2021
contractors and consultants
working on the cleanup in
August 2021
67%
of total contract employees
were Oregonians in August
2021
Advisory Report Highlights
ODOT Worked Quickly to Oversee the Largest Wildfire Debris Removal
Operation in State History
Key Areas
This advisory report answers five questions about the ODOT wildfire debris removal work underway across the state.
Question 1: Who cut down trees due to the 2020 wildfires on or near highway corridors?
Answer: ODOT and many other entities were involved in cutting down trees in the fire areas. During emergency
response, tree cutting crews worked to clear imminent tree hazards, prevent fires from spreading, and open roadways.
During recovery, with different landowners and easements along Oregon’s highway corridors, there were multiple public
and private parties who cut down damaged trees. ODOT has been removing trees around the highways to ensure the
safety of the corridors as well as removing trees to facilitate recovery and rebuilding. (pg. 7)
Question 2: How was ODOT’s criteria for assessing hazardous trees determined, what were the criteria factors,
and were any changes made to it during recovery efforts?
Answer: FEMA has insufficient criteria for what constitutes a hazardous tree from a wildfire event. ODOT’s contractor
developed hazardous tree removal criteria that used industry and Forest Service publications. ODOT’s criteria builds on
FEMA’s criteria and additionally considers factors such as a tree’s ability to strike the road, the tree species, fire
damage to the tree structure, and the likelihood of the tree’s survival. The criteria was revised several times after
implementation in the field. (pg. 20)
Question 3: What efforts has ODOT made to preserve and consider ecologically sensitive areas and cultural
resources when removing hazardous trees?
Answer: ODOT worked with various stakeholders and incorporated multiple, complex federal and state regulations to
create an Environmental Protection Plan (EPP). The EPP is the guide used by ODOT, consultants, and contractors to
address environmental needs while removing hazardous trees. (pg. 27)
Question 4: What happens to the trees that ODOT had cut on or near highway corridors?
Answer: ODOT has stored cut trees from its removal operations in the corridors since operations started as the trees
are the property of the landowner. Much of the trees cut were from Forest Service lands. Under a newly developed
process, ODOT will sell hazardous trees removed from federal land. (pg. 34)
Question 5: What mechanisms are in place for evaluating the recovery efforts? (e.g., after action reports for
continuous improvement mechanisms and capturing lessons learned)
Answer: The Governor’s Office completed an after action review of emergency response efforts but there is no
solidified plan for a state-level review of the recovery effort. However, ODOT intends to hire a consultant to conduct
an after action review on debris removal operations, one part of the state’s recovery efforts. ODOT management
recognizes there are areas for improvement, and we identified some additional areas that should be considered in
future planning efforts. (pg. 37)
ODOT Response
ODOT agrees with the opportunities listed in the report for continuous improvement. A reply from ODOT is at the end
of this advisory report. We greatly appreciate the agency’s collaboration and assistance on this review.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 1
Introduction
Wildfires are one of Oregon’s natural hazards that pose a significant threat to
many Oregon communities. The 2020 Labor Day wildfires burned more than
1.2 million acres spanning many counties, destroyed more than 5,000 homes
and businesses, and killed 9 people. The 2020 wildfires were the most
extreme fires the state has ever experienced in severity and expanse.
Labor Day fires burned across significant portions of the state
On August 20, 2020, Oregon Governor Kate Brown declared a statewide state
of emergency due to the imminent threat of wildfire. Within weeks of the
declaration, a significant windstorm triggered a series of catastrophic
wildfires, known generally as the Labor Day fires, that burned across
significant portions of the state. The Oregon Department of Forestry (ODF)
describes the Labor Day event as “unparalleled in Oregon’s history.” On the
morning of September 7, atop an expanding drought and historically low fuel
moisture and humidity, the National Weather Service issued a red flag warning
that conditions were ideal for wildfires to start and spread rapidly. On the
afternoon of September 7, a strong cold front arrived, bringing east-
northeast winds, which had wind gusts over 106 mph recorded. ODF reported
this was the strongest three-day wind event during the fire season since at
least 1950. During this period, both the national and northwest fire
preparedness levels were at their highest, meaning major incidents had the potential to exhaust all
agency fire resources. Under these conditions, a number of fires erupted and quickly grew out of
control. Within 24 hours, there were 12 counties battling extensive fires. Five fires spread west and
became among the top 20 largest wildfires in Oregon’s history. Five fires — Archie Creek, Beachie
Creek, Holiday Farm, Lionshead, and Riverside — each grew into megafires (100,000+ acres).
Over 500,000 Oregonians were placed under some level of evacuation notice as the fires threatened
and crossed the wildland-urban boundaries. Smoke from the wildfires blanketed much of the state.
Wildfire smoke emits a wide variety of pollutants into the air, and Oregonians experienced some of the
worst air quality ever recorded in the state in 2020. Oregon air reached unhealthy, very unhealthy, or
hazardous levels across the state, with all but one city having never previously experienced hazardous
air quality. Figure 1 depicts some major events from the state’s response to the 2020 Labor Day fires.
State Press Conference on
September 9, 2020:
“This is truly an all-hands-on-deck
moment for Oregon... Hundreds of
homes have been lost and we
continue to carry out mass
evacuations across the entire
state.”
- Governor Brown
“… this is a statewide event.
Absolutely no area in the state is
free from fire.
”
- Doug Grafe, ODF Chief of Fire
Protection
“… at this time in western Oregon,
in fact, anywhere in the state, all
individuals should be prepared [to
leave] at a moment’s notice.”
- Mariana Ruiz-Temple, OSFM
Deputy Chief State Fire Marshal
Source: Oregon State Police Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 2
Figure 1: Oregon’s emergency response to the Labor Day wildfires
AUGUST 20, 2020
Oregon Governor Kate Brown declares a statewide state
of emergency due to the imminent threat of wildfire.
SEPTEMBER 7, 2020
Firefighters respond to the fires and ODOT aiding in
response.
SEPTEMBER 7, 2020, to SEPTEMBER 14, 2020
Governor invokes Emergency Conflagration Act 15 times
to mobilize resources to protect life and property.
SEPT. 7
Beachie Creek @ 10:15 PM
Lionshead @ 10:15 PM
SEPT. 8
2-4-2 @ 1:00 AM
Holiday Farm @ 2:33 AM
Powerline @ 1:21 PM
Pike Road @ 4:00 PM
North Cascades @ 4:19 PM
Almeda@ 6:35 PM
South Obenchain @ 6:35PM
Riverside @ 8:35 PM
SEPT. 9
Chehalem @ 2:13 AM
Slater @ 10:00 AM
SEPT. 10
Archie Creek @ 9:45 PM
SEPT. 14
Brattain @ 3:25 PM
SEPTEMBER 8, 2020
State Emergency Coordination Center activates to
support coordination and response efforts.
Beachie and Lionshead fires merge.
SEPTEMBER 14, 2020
Oregon declares a state of emergency.
SEPTEMBER 15, 2020
Presidential disaster declaration.
SEPTEMBER 17, 2020
Statewide recovery efforts begin. OEM, ODOT, and DEQ
directors meet to discuss debris.
SEPTEMBER 19, 2020
Meeting with OEM, ODOT, DEQ, FEMA, Army Corps, and
AC Disaster Consulting to discuss debris and start the
Debris Management Task Force (DMTF).
SEPTEMBER 19, 2020, to SEPTEMBER 29, 2020
A lot of coordination and work by the DMTF, building
knowledge of debris, coordinating with counties
developing a right of entry process for distributing and
collecting, placing AC Disaster Consulting staff in each of
the counties, and working through policy issues (funding,
contracting authority, etc.).
SEPTEMBER 29, 2020
DMTF conduct webinars with counties.
SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
Counties affirm state management of debris removal
operations.
OCTOBER 4, 2020
FEMA Administrator meets with Governor Brown and
tours fire areas.
OCTOBER 5, 2020
FEMA Public Assistance Category A is granted for debris
removal. The Governor’s Wildfire Economic Recovery
Council convenes.
OCTOBER 12, 2020
The Wildfire Recovery Director is appointed.
OCTOBER 13, 2020
Wildfire Economic Recovery Team gives presentation
about debris removal and the “state managed, locally
coordinated” model.
OCTOBER 23, 2020
The Legislative Emergency Board approves funding for
debris operations, a critical step in moving forward.
OCTOBER 26, 2020
Kickoff meeting for the wildfire cleanup team — critical
shift to recovery operations.
OCTOBER 28, 2020
The Governor issues an Executive Order. The State
Recovery Plan and all State Recovery Functions (SRF)
are activated.
SEPT. 9 to
OCT. 13
Evacuation
orders in
effect in
various areas
across the
state.
SEPT. 8 to
SEPT. 18
Oregon’s air
quality ranks
among the
worst on the
planet.
SEPT. 7 to
SEPT. 10
Historic
wind
event.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 3
The Labor Day fires were mostly contained by late September or October. Even when a fire is fully
contained, it often will keep burning for weeks or months. As of November 4, 2020, ODF reported that
the six largest fires had stopped growing, but the fires were not fully contained. Figure 2 shows overall
and individual impacts of the fires.
Figure 2: Labor Day fires locations and statistics
Note: This map contains some of the major Labor Day fires but is not a complete representation of all of the fires that erupted
during the Labor Day wildfire event.
Source: Oregon Emergency Management and Governor’s Wildfire Economic Recovery Council report, January 2021.
Overall
Acres of land burned: 1.2 million
Homes or housing structures
destroyed: 4,021
Structures destroyed: 1,193
People sought shelter: 2,100
Lives lost: 9
Acres Burned by Fire
2-4-2 Fire: 14,468
Almeda: 2,977
Archie Creek: 131,596
Beachie Creek: 193,566
Brattain: 50,952
Echo Mtn.: 2,240
Holiday Farm: 173,395
Lionshead: 204,586
Riverside: 138,151
Slater: 45,369
S. Obenchain: 32,671
Thielsen: 9,951
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 4
Wildfire recovery efforts begin early to address Labor Day fire destruction
In emergency management terms, both short- and long-term recovery efforts begin in the midst of
responding to the emergency, as shown in Figure 3. The September 2020 wildfires required the state to
address fire recovery on an unprecedented scale in eight counties (Clackamas, Douglas, Jackson,
Klamath, Lane, Lincoln, Linn, and Marion). As firefighting agencies were working to contain the wildfires,
state and partner agencies were coordinating needed response resources and preparing for recovery
operations.
Figure 3: The recovery process is a continuum of overlapping activities that can span months to years
Source: FEMA, National Recovery Framework
Oregon had not previously handled debris of this magnitude that needed to be addressed as a part of
recovery. There was coordination between multiple governmental groups to provide direction and
support for recovery efforts to address the magnitude of this event, including:1
Governor’s Disaster Cabinet
As a part of the Governor’s disaster management framework, this group makes recommendations to
the Governor regarding statewide priorities and the allocation of state emergency resources.
Wildfire Economic Recovery Council
Comprised of over 40 elected officials, community leaders, congressional members, and state agencies
charged with evaluating the economic and community needs of Oregonians. The council established a
regional response team that included representatives from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), Regional Solutions,2 and key state and local agencies to identify recommendations and
next steps needed in the areas of housing and sheltering, debris and cleanup, and recovery and
rebuilding.
1 See Appendix A for a statewide organizational chart of recovery efforts.
2 The Regional Solutions program within the Governor’s Office works with state and local government, public and private entities,
and philanthropic organizations to develop and coordinate regional implementation projects and identify regional priorities for
community and economic development, address issues and seize opportunities.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 5
Oregon Debris Management Task Force
This task force, which includes the Oregon Office of Emergency Management (OEM), Oregon
Department of Transportation (ODOT), and Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) agency
directors and deputy directors, was formed to coordinate the removal of household hazardous waste
and ash and debris, such as hazardous trees, with counties, residents, and property owners. According
to OEM, a higher level of agency representation was needed to address the extensive policy issues that
the Debris Management Task Force would undertake.
Source: ODOT
The 2020 wildfires are the most expansive and expensive emergency disaster event in Oregon history,
and the state had never before undertaken such a widespread and complex recovery effort. The cost
alone for the cleanup of household hazardous waste, hazardous trees, ash, and debris to safely access
and rebuild homes and communities was initially estimated at $622 million. The state’s focus on
recovery and rebuilding efforts centered around Oregonians — how to make lives better for those
affected by the fires and how to help get livelihoods back. Those involved recognized that cleanup
would be complex and challenging. Part of the process involved key decisions and considerations to be
made regarding the state’s immediate and long-term role in emergency recovery work, including: total
cost of cleanup, cash flow and timing, who would perform the work, federally ineligible costs to support
long-term recovery, and accountability and oversight.
The resulting policy decisions regarding funding for the cleanup effort in the counties impacted
included:
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 6
• removal operations would be state managed, locally coordinated;3
• all homes and businesses destroyed by the fires would be eligible for state-led cleanup,
regardless of whether there was federal funding assistance; and
• foundation concrete removed as a part of site cleanup would be done at the expense of
the state, which was estimated at $21 million.
Besides the use of federal funds and State Highway Fund reserves to
help pay for wildfire debris removal, the Legislative Emergency Board
(E-Board) started making investments for recovery beginning in late
September 2020. ODOT was tasked with leading debris cleanup
activities from the wildfires. On October 23, 2020, the E-Board
allocated $50 million from the General Fund to ODOT for debris
removal, which was a final piece needed to get cleanup operations started, and later allotted $7 million
more in December 2020. ODOT anticipates it will request $83.3 million more from the General Fund to
cover remaining estimated costs for debris cleanup.
ODOT organized staff to manage debris operations and contracted with entities to perform the cleanup
work. Agency management dedicated staff to oversee the work of over 160 contractors and
subcontractors hired for debris removal operations to evaluate the condition of trees and remove ash,
debris, and hazardous trees. ODOT hired a contractor to act as an independent monitor of debris
management activities, as FEMA requires. Also, as a part of their role, the monitor is responsible for
ensuring cleanup work is conducted in a way that is sensitive to and protective of natural and cultural
resources.
At the request of ODOT and with legislative interest, we performed a limited review of its hazardous
tree removal operations due to public concerns over the extent of trees tagged and cut down in the
fire corridors. We focused our review on five areas of concern — which entities were involved in cutting
trees in the fire corridors, the development of the criteria used for identifying hazardous trees,
environmental protections in place during the tree removal process, tree disposal, and the extent of
after action reviews to learn and improve debris management operations for the next wildfire event.
3 State managed, locally coordinated means the state facilitates bringing in resources while cities and counties prioritize what to
clear, handle permitting issues, remove barriers to the work, and coordinate the right-of-entry process. Under emergency
management practices, local jurisdictions are initially responsible for response and recovery, but the state will step in to
coordinate those efforts when more than one county is affected or when local jurisdictions cannot respond. This was the case, as
the wildfire recovery tasks were too big for all the affected counties to handle on their own, and most did not have the capacity
and experience to address debris removal. Counties submitted delegations of authority, supporting the state taking on
responsibility; the Wildfire Economic Recovery Council also supported this approach.
FEMA indicated the total
eligible costs of more than
$570 million could trigger a
90% reimbursement with
10% state cost share.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 7
2020 Oregon Wildfire Hazardous Tree Removal
Questions and Answers
The 2020 wildfires provided Oregon an opportunity to better prepare for future disasters. ODOT
appears to be doing well managing hazardous tree removal operations; nonetheless, this incident was
unprecedented in Oregon’s history and the state could learn from the experience to be better
prepared.
This report provides the results of our review in the form of questions-and-answers to critical
questions and risks we identified based on public concerns and conversations or correspondence with
ODOT and stakeholders.
Question 1: Who cut down trees due to the 2020 wildfires on or near
highway corridors?
Answer: ODOT and many other entities were involved in cutting down trees in the fire
areas. During emergency response, tree cutting crews worked to clear imminent tree
hazards, prevent fires from spreading, and open roadways. During recovery, with
different landowners and easements along Oregon’s highway corridors, there were
multiple public and private parties who cut down damaged trees. ODOT has been
removing trees around the highways to ensure the safety of the corridors as well as
removing trees to facilitate recovery and rebuilding.
Emergency response for the 2020 wildfires was the largest in Oregon’s history
Oregon’s Governor, Oregon Department of Forestry, and the Oregon State Fire Marshal (OSFM) led the
response to the wildfires. Oregon’s Emergency Coordination Center and Joint Information Center were
activated on September 8, 2020, to support coordination of the expanded response efforts across the
state. ODF and OSFM leveraged state, regional, and national firefighting resources. The Governor
declared emergency conflagrations for individual fires as well as one statewide between September 7
and September 14, which allows mobilizing firefighters to assist local resources battling fires. The
President declared a Major Disaster Declaration on September 15. FEMA sent requested resources to
the state to help combat the fires. During the peak of fire activity, there were over 7,500 personnel
from across the nation and Canada who were assigned to help battle Oregon’s wildfires.
ODF’s goal for firefighting is to put the fires out quickly, at the smallest possible size, to protect forest
resources and save lives. Fire-damaged trees can pose a fire hazard to the safety of firefighting crews.
Tree cutting during emergency response removes imminent hazards along highways and in fire areas to
ensure safe movement of fire crews through the fire corridor. This includes cutting down trees that
threaten public roadways and locating, identifying, and mitigating hazardous trees to help create fire
control lines to help contain and stop the fire’s spread.
Recovery work starts shortly after emergency response starts. Figure 4 shows the timeline of key
recovery events that occurred following the emergency response to the wildfires.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 8
Figure 4: Oregon’s recovery to the Labor Day wildfires
SEPTEMBER 7, 2020
Firefighters respond to wildfires. Roads are closed, and
evacuation orders are in effect for fire areas.
Firefighters fell trees that pose risk to public roads and
locate, identify, and remove any other hazardous trees.
ODOT, utilities, and others assists in the response.
Phase 1 tree removal begins as ODOT clears hazards to
reopen highways but varies based on the fire. As able,
utilities remove hazardous trees around power
infrastructure and restore power. As evacuations are
lifted, public and private landowners can begin removing
hazardous trees and debris from property, conducting
their own salvage logging and sales.
OCTOBER 6, 2020
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) issues
guidance on what is eligible for FHWA ER funds vs
FEMA Public Assistance (PA) which establishes a
definition for Phase 1 vs. Phase 2 hazardous tree
and debris removal long state highway and federal-
aid transportation routes.
OCTOBER 17, 2020, to DECEMBER 5, 2020
EPA conducts initial household hazardous
waste cleanup, paving the way for additional
PPDR ash & debris cleanup to take place by
ODOT contractors.
OCTOBER 22, 2020, to NOVEMBER 19,2020
ODOT contracting for a project management
monitoring firm. CDR awarded the contract.
NOVEMBER 5, 2020, to NOVEMBER 30, 2020
ODOT contracting for hazardous tree
removal prime contractors.
NOVEMBER 19, 2020
CDR Maguire, Inc. (CDR) subcontracts with Mason Bruce
& Girard (MB&G).
NOVEMBER 13, 2020, to DECEMBER 22, 2020
ODOT contracting for PPDR ash and debris
removal prime contractors.
DECEMBER 22, 2020
Phase 2 hazardous tree tagging begins.
JANUARY 1, 2021
First hazardous tree removal criteria
developed.
JANUARY 15, 2021
First hazardous tree cut; cutting, decking, and
processing slash begins.
JANUARY 16, 2021
First PPDR ash and debris removed.
JANUARY and FEBRUARY 2021
ODOT starts planning and negotiating settlement sales
to transfer title of Forest Service and Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) timber to ODOT.
MARCH 14, 2021
MB&G memo to staff to begin using quality
control program to perform a second review
of hazardous trees.
APRIL 11, 2021, to APRIL 19, 2021
EPA returns to do additional household hazardous waste
removal work.
JULY 29, 2021
ODOT completes contracts with federal
entities to purchase timber.
AUGUST 2021
ODOT starts advertising for tree sales of the salvage
timber from the 2020 wildfires.
SEPT. 27
to DEC. 30
DROP
version 1
developed.
SEPT. 7 to
Early DEC
Recovery
Phase 1
(FHWA ER
funds the
work and
FEMA PA
Category B.
OCT 5 to
Summer
2022
Recovery
Phase 2
(FEMA PA
Category A
approved).
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 9
Early recovery work focused on hazardous waste and clearing immediate hazards from
roadways
Wildfire recovery efforts were separated into two phases: Phase 1 and Phase 2. This was due to the
different federal funding sources authorized for the recovery work.
Recognizing the scale of the wildfire emergency event, OEM contracted with AC Disaster Consulting,
LLC, a private emergency management firm with offices nationwide. AC Disaster Consulting, which has
national expertise in debris monitoring and management operations, had previously worked with OEM
as the state’s owner representative on prior declared disasters. The firm assisted the Oregon Debris
Management Task Force with federal funding processes and information to local governments to make
decisions on how to do the debris cleanup.
Phase 1 recovery work started roughly around mid-September 2020 and involved hazardous waste
removal and initial roadway cleanup. On September 21, 2020, staff from federal and state agencies
jointly began preliminary damage assessments of public infrastructure and private property.
DEQ partnered with the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to evaluate property within the
counties affected by the fires for household hazardous waste and other dangerous substances, and
safely remove them as necessary.
4 Examples of hazardous waste include propane tanks, ammunition,
oil, gasoline, solvents, paints, pesticides, and bulk asbestos. This cleanup work started in mid-October
4 This work fell under FEMA Public Assistance Category B (Emergency Protective Measures), with the state share coming from
the General Fund that the Legislature approved in DEQ’s budget. This assistance was granted to the eight counties as well as
most neighboring counties affected by the fires.
ODOT embedded during emergency response to Holiday
Farm Fire
Unique within the Holiday Farm Fire corridor, ODOT was
embedded into the emergency response operations.
Between the time when the fires ignited and September 19,
2020, the area was in a state of emergency and under the
control of ODF Fire Command and the Lane County Sheriff.
During this period, ODOT aided and assessed highway
conditions, closed roads, and set up roadblocks. At the
request of Fire Command, ODOT, escorted by firefighters,
plowed Highway 126 to push rocks and debris out of the
roadway to help free trapped engines. Fire Command's tree
cutting crews worked to clear tree hazards from the highway
and later, Fire Command and ODOT established a joint
operation with contracted tree cutting crews and ODOT staff
to remove imminent hazards to the fire crews along the
highway. ODOT staff remained embedded within the fire
operations as Fire Command sought to ensure safe travel
through the highway corridor. On September 20, 2020, the
emergency abated and ODOT regained control over the
highway.
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 10
and was predominantly completed by early December 2020 and paved the way for ODOT’s ash and
debris removal efforts to then complete site cleanup.5 The household hazardous waste was cleaned up
at no cost to the property owner.
Source: ODOT
Work to reopen highways, which included clearing immediate hazards, was eligible for funding from the
Federal Highway Administration’s Emergency Relief Program. As the fires were still burning and
firefighters were trying to gain containment, ODOT began clearing trees and other debris from
roadways, pushing it off to the side of the road to open one lane of traffic for essential personnel to
access areas within the corridors.
While the fires were still active, ODOT staff also began surveying the damage in accessible areas for
emergency protective measures. ODOT foresters reported tens of thousands of hazardous trees
needed to be removed and reported it would not be practical to have ODOT foresters mark all those
trees. In some areas, ODOT worked with contractors to remove immediate danger trees on public and
private land along the highway rights of way to facilitate highway re-opening. ODOT did not remove
any trees out of the fire corridors during this time.
While ODOT was addressing debris impacting the roadways, other parties were in the area assessing
their properties and some also were cutting down trees. For example:
5 Property owners who did not sign up while the EPA was doing work in their area were still allowed to participate in the state-led
cleanup. Property owners had till September 15, 2021, to sign up to participate.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 11
• The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service assembled a Burned Area
Emergency Response team of experts in soils, geology, hydrology, engineering, botany,
recreation, archaeology, wildlife, fisheries, and Geographic Information Systems in late
September 2020 to assess post-fire effects to their managed lands.
• Utility companies, which have easements on public and private lands that allow them to
cut vegetation and trees in order to manage and maintain their power infrastructure,
were cutting trees.6 ODOT forester reports documented utility companies had crews
removing trees that threatened powerlines or impacted reconstructing powerlines
within different fire corridors. Trees that utilities fell were left at the site for the
property owner.
• When evacuation orders were lifted — which was dynamic based on address conditions
— and roads were accessible to the public, private landowners (both individual and
commercial) were able to address any tree damage on their property.7 They could cut
and remove trees off their property as they saw fit.
Source: ODOT
During the emergency, there was no tracking or quantifying the number or location of trees cut during
the response and Phase 1 recovery period. There are no reliable figures on the quantities of trees cut
by whom.
6 The scope of our review did not include utility easements on federal and private property as these are not lands managed by
the state. The easements are between the utility companies and federal entities or private landowners.
7 Evacuation orders were in place as of September 9th and reached their peak on September 12th, when about 698,100 people
were under some form of evacuation level. The most significant decline in evacuations occurred on September 22nd, and all
evacuation orders in the state were lifted as of October 14, 2020.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 12
Additional recovery work focused on removing widespread hazards to highway safety
and assisting with personal property cleanup
When FEMA approved the state for FEMA Public Assistance Category A – Debris Removal8 on October
5, 2020, debris removal became the responsibility of FEMA and use of funds from the Federal Highway
Administration’s Emergency Relief Program for roadway cleanup became ineligible. This is where
recovery efforts started to transition to Phase 2.
Phase 2 recovery work focused on hazardous tree and ash and debris removal.9
• Right-of-Way hazardous tree removal (ROW) - removal of cut trees, slash, debris, and
log decks left from wildfire response efforts and trees located along public roadways
that would impact travel safety.10 There were nearly 120 miles of highway affected by
the wildfires.
• Private Property Debris Removal (PPDR) - removal of ash, debris, and hazardous trees
from burned properties as well as property soil testing for all cleaned properties for
individuals who elected to have the state do the cleanup for them. As of September 29,
2021, there were 3,080 private property lots enrolled for cleanup.
8 FEMA Public Assistance Category A (Debris Removal) provides funding for the clearance, removal, and disposal of wreckage
from the emergency work or other disaster-related wreckage (e.g., trees, woody debris, mud, damaged building pieces and
contents). Government agencies are responsible for the debris removal.
9 See Appendix C for examples of ODOT’s right-of-way hazardous tree removal and PPDR work.
10 Where ODOT has rights of way within the fire corridors, the area width varies from 80 to 200 feet; otherwise, there are
easements that set the area around the paved highway that ODOT maintains to ensure highway safety. The actual work zone for
the Phase 2 recovery work may extend beyond ODOT’s rights of way or easements.
As part of its everyday work, ODOT has authority and removes hazardous trees on public and private
property to ensure the safety of the highways
As part of regular highway maintenance, ODOT maintenance managers determine immediate tree hazards
and remove the trees to help maintain a safe and efficient transportation system.
State laws and rules (ORS 366.365 and OAR 734-035-0150) allow ODOT to cut and remove any tree located
on private property that threatens the highway and creates an immediate and substantial risk of damage or
injury, which occurs when the tree:
• interferes with the safe, unrestricted movement of traffic;
• is encroaching on the state highway; or
• is in a condition that creates a reasonable likelihood it will, in the foreseeable future, encroach on
the state highway to a degree that traffic should be restricted or prohibited from using the highway.
ODOT is allowed to enter private property to remove the tree if the owner is not readily available; the agency
must provide a written notice to the property owner after the fact. Trees are left on the property if it
reasonable to do so, otherwise the owner has 30 days to claim or recover the tree at the property owner’s
expense.
ODOT maintains a Memorandum of Understanding with the Forest Service regarding construction,
maintenance, and operation of state highways within federal forests. As part of this memorandum, ODOT
may identify and remove imminent hazardous trees, leaving the logs in a safe location to dispose of.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 13
AC Disaster Consulting continued providing FEMA Public Assistance Program technical assistance
during Phase 2. Additionally, the firm provides project management and compliance monitoring for the
project, as well as providing customer service to PPDR subrecipients and working directly with FEMA to
facilitate public assistance delivery.
As part of Phase 2 recovery, a number of
contractors and consultants were brought in
to help organize and conduct the debris
removal work. Beginning in October and
continuing through December 2020, ODOT
contracted for debris removal operation
services. ODOT required all of its contracted
firms to submit a diversity plan to provide
opportunities for local and diverse
contractors.
ODOT contracted with an external monitoring firm, as FEMA requires monitoring of all debris
operations as a condition of public assistance. ODOT selected CDR Maguire, Inc. (CDR) through a
competitive bidding process.12 Monitoring activities eligible for FEMA reimbursement included
overseeing actual cleanup activities by hazardous tree and debris removal subcontractors;
documenting hazardous tree and debris removal and related support services from burned areas;
assisting ODOT in developing a system to review invoices and track costs of removal operations at
each cleanup site; and ensuring that key people are properly trained to conduct the assigned work.
CDR subcontracted with Mason, Bruce, & Girard, Inc. (MB&G) for additional arborists and foresters for
hazardous tree identification. All arborists and foresters were required to have an arborist credential or
forestry degree as well as at least five years of post-fire assessment in northwest forests.
13 CDR also
subcontracted with MB&G and Historical Research Associates Inc. (HRA) for identifying and helping to
protect environmental and cultural resources during tree removal operations. ODOT pays an hourly
rate for CDR’s monitoring work.
Given the large geographic area and immense volume of work, ODOT elected to award the hazardous
tree and ash and debris removal contracts over multiple operational areas and not as a single statewide
contract. ODOT contracted with five prime contractors to perform the hazardous tree and debris
removal work: AshBritt, Inc. and K&E Excavating, Inc. for ash and debris; and Ceres Environmental
Services, Inc., ECC Constructors, LLC., and Suulutaaq, Inc. for hazardous trees. Examples of FEMA-
eligible activities performed by prime contractors conducting tree removal services included:
• mobilizing and demobilizing work crews from the site of operations;
11 This included promoting and supporting entrepreneurs and small businesses, expanding business development, connecting rural
communities to urban markets, promoting mentoring for enterprises that are disadvantaged, minority-owned, women-owned,
emerging small businesses, service-disable veteran’s businesses (DBE, MBE, WBE, ESB, and SDV) that are certified COBID, as well
as self-certified Small Businesses, and supporting local communities.
12 ODOT used a modified form of emergency contracting to satisfy FEMA’s requirements for competitive contracting.
13 A Certified Arborist credential from the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) or a Forestry degree from a Society of
American Foresters accredit forestry school as well as at least five verifiable years of post-fire assessment in Northwest conifer
forests along with mixed deciduous tree stands – for tree health and stability and demonstrated understanding of forest
management practice.
While FEMA does not require contractual or aspiration
goals for diversity, ODOT included goals and values into
its contracts and required contractors to report
demographic figures to ensure alignment. For August
2021, Oregon-based firms reportedly made up 155 of
the 163 subcontractors (95%). Oregonians make up
67% of total project employees. The Debris
Management Task Force also reported greater gender
diversity than post-disaster recovery work worldwide
and a higher racial and ethnic diversity than ODOT’s
Aspiration Diversity Targets for federally funded projects.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 14
• removing marketable logs, loading the logs onto trucks, transporting them to
designated log decking areas, off-loading and decking the logs;
• transporting debris tree slash to chipping sites, and spreading the chips at designated
areas for erosion and sediment control purposes; and,
• controlling traffic around work zones.14
ODOT’s tree removal prime contractors are paid a set rate based on the size of log or tree for their
hazardous tree removal work. FEMA requires extensive documentation to substantiate work performed
and determine reimbursement eligibility. Each tree removed must be cataloged and photographed.15
Contractor invoices are reviewed by CDR, AC Disaster Consulting, and ODOT prior to payment.
Contractors are not allowed to remove any tree not previously identified, documented, and marked for
removal by arborists or foresters. Contractors may be fined $2,000 per tree for removing any
unmarked tree. As of the beginning of August 2021, seven trees that may have been improperly
removed were under review by ODOT management.
To oversee contractor work, ODOT managed the Phase 2 work under the Incident Command System
(ICS).
16 CDR, as the project monitor, was also required to staff key positions that reflected ICS’s five
functional areas: command, operations, planning, logistics, and finance/administration. These contract
positions supported ODOT’s Incident Management Team; for example, implementing the Debris
Removal Operations Plan and developing strategies to accomplish incident objectives.17
Phase 2 recovery work began in December 2020, with contractors ready. Within each fire corridor,
there were multiple organizations and people on-site involved in the hazardous tree removal process.
This included CDR arborists identifying and tagging trees, CDR staff recording tree information, MB&G
staff reviewing tagging trees and consulting on environmental requirements, Historical Research
Associates consulting on cultural resources, prime contractor crews cutting trees, ODOT staff ensuring
contractors are adhering to contract terms and resolving issues, AC Disaster Consulting staff making
sure FEMA reimbursement requirements are being met, and Army Corps of Engineers staff monitoring
operations for FEMA. Together these contractors have a broad range of environmental, natural
resource, regulatory, and subject matter expertise. ODOT on-scene incident commanders monitor and
provide broad oversight of the full operation and all project teams to ensure recovery work is done in
accordance with contract terms and the Debris Removal Operations Plan. The ODOT on-scene incident
commanders also have ODOT staff to support them in a variety of operational roles, such as geological
and forestry expertise, safety, and staff support. Figure 5 shows the staff working within the fire
corridors and their roles.
Daily, project teams work their way through fire-impacted corridors to assess, re-assess, and perform
signoffs for quality control and regulatory compliance before fire-damaged trees are cut. Team
members meet on site each morning to receive safety and operational briefings, assignments, and
objectives for the day. In addition to daily field briefings, these project teams stay connected through
14 Debris tree slash consists of an assortment of tree limbs, non-marketable logs of all sizes, and other vegetative materials.
15 Full details are shown in Appendix D.
16 The Incident Command System is a standardized approach to the command, control, and coordination of on-scene incident
management that provides a common structure within which personnel from multiple organizations can be effective. The
structure integrates and coordinates procedures, personnel, equipment, facilities, and communications.
17 See Appendix B for the organizational structure for the hazardous tree and debris removal effort.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 15
weekly coordination calls, weekly task force leadership check-ins, and daily oversight and coordination
with on-scene incident commanders. Figure 6 and Figure 7 show where these teams are working along
the highways in the three largest fire corridors.
Figure 5: Numerous staff were involved in the right-of-way hazardous tree work within the fire corridors
Those Involved in Hazardous Tree Removal
Operations Within the Fire Corridors Roles and Responsibilities
Total
Staff in
the Fire
Corridors
May 2021
Total
Staff in
the Fire
Corridors
Aug. 2021
ODOT Performing oversight and
management of operations 13 10
Project Monitoring Consultant
– CDR
Tagging damaged trees
deemed hazardous and
monitoring that work
114 67
Project Monitoring Consultant
Subcontractor –MB&G
Conducting tree tagging,
tree removal quality control
review, and environmental
monitoring
40 35
Project Monitoring Consultant
Subcontractor – HRA
Mapping, monitoring, and
notifying of cultural
resources in work zones
15 10
Owner’s Representative
Consultant – AC Disaster
Consulting
Monitoring to help ensure
work meets FEMA
requirements
4 2
Prime Contractors - Suulutaaq,
Ceres, and ECC
Cutting the trees tagged as
hazardous for removal 126 105
Prime Contractors – Suulutaaq,
Ceres, and ECC
Hauling cut trees, debris,
and processing and decking
cut logs as well as grinding
slash into wood chips
14 27
Prime Contractors – Suulutaaq,
Ceres, and ECC
Providing traffic control for
safe travel through the fire
corridors during the removal
operations
84 71
Prime Contractors – Suulutaaq,
Ceres, and ECC
Implementing erosion
control measures 14 3
US Army Corps of Engineers Providing overall supervision
for FEMA 8 3
Totals 432 333
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 16
Figure 6: Hazardous tree removal along the highway right of way in the three largest fire corridors
Notes: Figures depict right-of-way trees cut or tagged to be removed as of September 15, 2021. PPDR hazardous trees are not
included in the figure.
Source: CDR data.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 17
Figure 7: Close up views of sections of right-of-way hazardous tree removal in the largest fire corridors
The dots represent individual trees inspected by arborists or foresters because the trees had visible
fire damage. ODOT’s right-of-way work zone varies based on the terrain. One of the farthest distances
from the road is depicted on each map. According to ODOT, the trees being removed are hazardous
and within striking distance of the road. Different factors, like the height of the tree and slope of the
terrain, impact how far from the road trees need to be removed to make the highways safe.
Notes: Figures depict right-of-way trees cut or tagged to be removed as of September 15, 2021. PPDR hazardous trees are not
included in the figure.
Source: CDR data.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 18
Figure 8 illustrates what someone might see driving though a fire corridor. One view may include the
lands of multiple owners. For example, ODOT has easements or rights of way along the highways, and
utilities may also have easements that overlap in the same area.
Figure 8: ODOT, private landowners, and utilities perform work visible from the highways – sometimes
adjacent to or on top of one another – making it difficult to discern whose work the public is viewing
Note: The distance of ODOT’s work zone from the road varies based on the slope of the terrain and height of trees.
Source: Auditor-produced representative illustration. Illustrations do not depict a specific location but rather are a compilation of
photos of damage across multiple 2020 Oregon wildfire work areas.
Up until at least September 2021, ODOT had not removed trees from the fire corridors as the trees cut
down from ODOT’s work were legally owned by other entities and no sales had been completed. ODOT
was awaiting agreements with the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to transfer
ownership so it could advertise and sell the timber on the open market. This arrangement is intended
to expedite removing the timber from the fire corridors where there is limited storage space.
ODOT’s Phase 2 debris removal responsibilities does not include replanting and restoration of trees in
the fire affected corridors. Most of the hazardous trees removed were on private or federal lands and it
is the landowner’s choice of what they want to do on their property. According to ODOT management,
native grasses, shrubs, forbs, and deciduous tree sprouts have reestablished this past spring in most
areas where removal work occurred. From collaborative efforts with federal and state partners, it is
also anticipated that many of the habitat trees left in the corridors will help provide dynamic forest
conditions for regeneration and growth as well has habitat benefits. There are also some local
organizations that have programs to partner with private landowners with replanting and restoration
efforts.
Phase 2 recovery work was estimated to take around six to 18 months to complete. As of September
24, 2021, the percentage of completed work was about 66% for hazardous tree removal and 88% for
clearing individual home and commercial properties. Yet there have been factors affecting the work,
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 19
such as difficult terrain to access in some corridors, weather conditions, fire season restrictions, and
concerns with contractor work. For example, Oregon had record-breaking heatwaves in 2021 that
further stressed fire-damaged trees, fire season restrictions limiting or stopping work in a corridor,
delays with a prime contractor to complete work, and the changing of the prime contractor working on
the Beachie/Lionshead and Riverside fire corridors.
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 20
Question 2: How was ODOT’s criteria for assessing hazardous trees
determined, what were the criteria factors, and were any changes
made to it during recovery efforts?
Answer: FEMA has insufficient criteria for what constitutes a hazardous tree from a
wildfire event. ODOT’s contractor developed hazardous tree removal criteria that used
industry and Forest Service publications. ODOT’s criteria builds on FEMA’s criteria and
additionally considers factors such as a tree’s ability to strike the road, the tree species,
fire damage to the tree structure, and the likelihood of the tree’s survival. The criteria
was revised several times after implementation in the field.
ODOT had criteria and protocols created to assess
whether damaged trees were hazardous, as FEMA
criteria was not designed for wildfire disasters
FEMA has criteria defining what constitutes a hazardous tree, but
it is geared toward disaster events like hurricanes, ice storms, and
tornadoes, not wildfires. With no specific FEMA guidance, ODOT
and AC Disaster Consulting had early conversations with FEMA to
define a “hazardous tree” in the wildfire landscape to make sure
the state would be eligible for federal public assistance to help pay
for the cleanup. A primary goal for ODOT when removing
hazardous trees is safety for those traveling through the corridors
and preventing trees that would later fall onto roadways or
structures. Additional factors considered for tree removal were
adhering to state and local regulations, laws, and ordinances for
environmental and historical preservation.
The 2020 wildfires left many damaged trees adjacent to the
highways. The number of trees to remove was initially estimated
at 300,000 and later reduced to around 140,000. With the multiple
parties involved, ODOT had its contractor, CDR, establish the
criteria to use in determining which damaged trees are hazardous
that need to be removed. CDR hired an arborist, in partnership
with a MB&G forester, to lead in developing the tree removal
criteria specifications. According to the arborist and forester
involved, the protocols were formed from researching
International Society of Arboriculture and Forest Service
hazardous tree assessment publications, academic papers for
specific tree species mortality after a wildfire, and criteria used by
California and other arborists and foresters for similar situations.
September 7, 2020
Historic wildfire
event begins.
September 27,
2020
ODOT begins to
develop the Oregon
Wildfire DROP.
November 17, 2020
FEMA directs
ODOT/DMTF to
proceed with hazard
tree work for
reimbursement.
November 19, 2020
CDR hired as debris
monitoring firm;
CDR hires MB&G as
sub-contractor.
January 1, 2021
CDR completes the
first version of the
hazardous tree
removal criteria.
Hazardous tree
removal criteria
being used in the
field.
January 1, 2021
through May 27
2021
Hazardous tree
removal criteria
revised 10 times.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 21
The first protocols were released in
early January 2021, and project
arborists were trained on them. They
used debris management software
applications to capture data on
damaged trees deemed hazardous to
meet FEMA reimbursement
documentation requirements. The
criteria was revised after it was
implemented in the field as staff
realized more clarification and
modifications were needed to
recognize operational realities in the
field. The criteria continued to evolve,
with multiple versions, up until May
2021. Whenever there were changes
to the criteria, consultants stated that
trees were reassessed to make sure
they met the existing criteria prior to
being cut down.
Figure 9 shows the cumulative status
of inspected trees for all of the fire
corridors as well as the status of trees
in the three largest fire corridors. This
includes trees tagged but yet to be
cut, trees that have been cut, and
trees detagged after another review
deemed them not hazardous.
Top: A cutting crew member working atop the
steep cliffs in the Riverside Fire along Highway
224.
Bottom: A chainsaw perched on the edge of a
cliff in the Riverside Fire corridor.
Source: Suulutaaq, Inc.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 22
Figure 9: Cumulative status of inspected damaged trees as of August 19, 2021
Note: Only trees that suffered damage from the wildfires are inspected and included in the data. The data does include trees withou t visible damage. Additional trees will continue to be assessed as
the work progresses.
Source: CDR data.
All Fires
-
29,588
39,058
47,682
57,887
62,042
1,714
11,669
31,977
56,008
68,625
76,154
82,647
89,169
93,585
-  50,000  100,000
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Inspected Fire-Damaged Trees
Detagged Cut Pending Cut
Riverside
6,863
13,040
14,160
14,673
15,452
16,519
17,588
-  50,000  100,000
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Inspected Fire-Damaged Trees
Detagged Cut Pending Cut
Beachie Creek/Lionshead
3,030
5,902
12,217
15,718
18,303
20,309
22,154
22,891
-  50,000  100,000
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Inspected Fire-Damaged Trees
Detagged Cut Pending Cut
Holiday Farm
2,992
9,357
17,412
21,244
22,947
24,821
27,435
29,255
-  50,000  100,000
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Inspected Fire-Damaged Trees
Detagged Cut Pending Cut
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 23
ODOT criteria includes multiple factors to assess whether
damaged trees pose a hazard
Key components of ODOT’s hazardous tree removal criteria
include FEMA’s definition of a hazardous tree, information about
specific tree species, the extent of fire
damage to a tree’s structure,
characteristics of the terrain, and a
tree’s likelihood of survival.
FEMA considers a tree to be hazardous
if its condition was caused by a
disaster; it is an immediate threat to
lives, public health and safety, or
improved property — meaning any structure, facility, or
equipment that was built, constructed, or manufactured; it has a
diameter breast height, or the diameter of a tree taken 4.5 feet
above the ground line on the uphill side of a tree, of six inches or
greater; and one or more of the following criteria are met:
• 50% or more of the branches, leaves, and structures
extending from the trunk are damaged or destroyed;
• a split trunk or broken branches exposes the heartwood, or
central, supporting pillar of a tree;
• it has fallen or been uprooted within a public-use area; or
• it is leaning at an angle greater than 30 degrees.
ODOT’s hazardous tree criteria have several additional factors to
help assess wildfire damage. A key criterion is whether a tree is
within what is known as striking distance of the road, which
considers the height of a tree.18 Arborists assessing trees also look
at the slope of the landscape and how much a tree leans to
determine if a tree threatens a road. In addition, they assess:
• the species of a tree, which provides information about a
tree’s resilience;
• the fire damage to a tree’s structure — including the extent to
which a tree’s branches and leaves has been scorched — bark
char, which is how much the base of the tree and stem are
damaged, and whether the root system is burned out or the
growing part of the trunk is dry or brittle; and
• insect damage and disease.
18 Striking distance is defined as 1.5 times the tree’s total height. If a tree is 100 feet tall, the striking distance is 150 f eet from the
road right of way, defined as the edge of the asphalt. While this is one criteria, the slope of the terrain may necessitate removing
trees farther than 1.5 times a tree’s total height.
March 14, 2021
MB&G issues memo
to staff to begin
using QC guide.
March 20, 2021
Second and final
version of QC
program guide
issued.
May 27, 2021
Current version of
tree assessment
protocol, version 10,
completed.
June 2, 2021
Independent
arborist issues
report on ODOT
hazardous tree
operation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 24
ODOT’s criteria are tailored to the different topography within each fire corridor, which ranges from flat
and gentle to the presence of vertical cliffs. Collateral trees are cut if needed to safely fell hazardous
trees in the area. For trees atop steep cliffs, the initial assessment is done using a drone. An analyst
assesses the data and makes the determination about whether the tree needs to be removed. If it
does, then cutters rope to the tree to remove it. In this way, Oregon’s drone program, which is
supported by FEMA, limits the risk to workers.
Left: Flat ground along Highway 22 in the Beachie Creek/Lionshead Fire corridor.
Center: Sloped ground along Highway 22 in the Beachie Creek/Lionshead Fire corridor.
Right: Steep cliffs along Highway 224 in the Riverside Fire corridor.
ODOT appeared to take measures to conserve trees. The agency uses a three-year timeframe, instead
of FEMA’s five-year period, for evaluating the potential risk of hazardous trees to roads, which reduced
the number of trees removed. Additionally, trees on the cusp of being a safety risk were not removed
and will be monitored to see how they respond to the dry summer months, the ongoing drought, wind
events, winter storms, and soil erosion due to the fires. Such was the case for the Eagle Creek Fire in
2016, where additional hazardous trees were removed for years after the fire.
Oregon’s extreme heat and drought conditions in the summer of 2021 has affected already stressed
trees that were left within the fire corridors. According to ODOT, the agency plans to take another pass
through each corridor as part of the final cleanup process, and while FEMA is still helping to pay for the
removal, to make sure all hazardous trees have been removed. As of mid-August 2021, consultants
visually estimated there are another 750 trees need to be reassessed as they may now meet the
criteria to be considered hazardous.
ODOT instituted a quality control review process for right-of-way tree removal
As this was the first time the state was conducting this magnitude of debris management work,
multiple organizations and people were involved with the hazardous tree identification and removal
(e.g., multiple arborists, tree cutting firms, and consultants), and there was public scrutiny of how trees
were being identified and removed. MB&G conducted a quality control review process to provide
assurance and further consistency in hazardous tree determinations. This is not required by FEMA and
is atypical according to the consultants we spoke with. The purpose of the quality control review was
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 25
to limit misinterpretation of the tree removal criteria by the many arborists assessing the trees and
ensure all trees have been identified correctly and only remove trees according to hazardous tree
criteria.
The quality control process begins after arborists assess and tag hazardous trees for removal in a fire
corridor. Personnel from MB&G conduct this process in two phases. First, before cutting operations,
MB&G arborists or foresters reassess trees that have been marked, or not marked if they note damage
that appears to meet the hazardous criteria, for removal. Trees that had been previously marked for
removal can be detagged and trees not previously marked can be newly tagged, in accordance with
current hazardous tree criteria. Second, during cutting operations, MB&G arborists or foresters work
directly with the cutters to make a final assessment on the trees and they assist with marking collateral
trees that may need to be taken out to safely remove hazardous trees.
Criteria for this quality control process was drafted as of the start of January 2021, at which point no
trees had been cut, and the final criteria were implemented by early March 2021. As CDR arborists and
tree cutters were already in the field, there were about 12,400 trees initially cut and removed prior to
the March implementation of the formal quality control process. The vast majority of trees removed
(over 80%) were subject to the finalized quality control review process.
Left: A hazardous tree marked for removal.
Center: A tree tag.
Right: Tree tags that have been removed through the quality control process. | Source: CDR
ODOT had an independent consultant review its hazardous tree identification process
ODOT retained Washington Forestry Consultants, Inc. to conduct an independent review of the
agency’s hazardous tree operations. The focus of the review was to help address concerns raised about
tree operations, how trees were determined to be hazardous, and the qualifications of individuals
making those determinations. For the evaluation, the consultant reviewed documents used to
implement and manage the hazardous tree removal program, a sample of trees, qualifications of
contracted arborists and foresters, and data gathered on hazardous trees for accuracy and
completeness.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 26
The consultant’s June 2021 report19 concluded that no changes were needed to ODOT’s current
protocols. The review found:
• ODOT had the necessary operational plan, protocols, contracts, and requirements
necessary to conduct the operation and provide quality assurance. Protocols and data
were consistent with industry standards.
• Over 96% of the trees were correctly marked. This level of agreement was considered
very good given the variability of the tree populations and tree damage, the difficult
terrain, and weather challenges.
• 99% of the trees marked for removal were dead or in poor condition.
• 98% of the arborists and foresters were qualified to do the work.
• The quality control review of the trees after the arborists and foresters have inspected
them was adequate.
The consultant estimated about 42% of the tree population along the three largest fire corridors had
been marked for removal, meaning that 58% of the trees were preserved.
19 Read the independent consultant’s report here.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 27
Question 3: What efforts has ODOT made to preserve and consider
ecologically sensitive areas and cultural resources when removing
hazardous trees?
Answer: ODOT worked with various stakeholders and incorporated multiple, complex
federal and state regulations to create an Environmental Protection Plan (EPP). The EPP
is the guide used by ODOT, consultants, and contractors to address environmental
needs while removing hazardous trees.
ODOT’s statewide Environmental Protection Plan
incorporated complex regulations and involved input
from a variety of stakeholders
Environmental laws are in place to protect human health and
natural resources, both at a federal and state level. For emergency
recovery, the Governor can waive environmental regulations.
While this may have been the case in other states, Oregon
preserved environmental regulations. Oregon has a wealth of
natural resources of great importance to its people.
With limited state plans in place for debris removal, ODOT had to
rapidly develop an Environmental Protection Plan (EPP), a part of
its Debris Removal Operations Plan (DROP), to help protect public
safety, health, and the environment during emergency recovery
efforts.
In creating the EPP, ODOT staff faced the challenge of addressing
an unprecedented crisis while maintaining compliance with a
myriad of regulations – at least 11 federal and 17 state laws – as
well as adhering to several forest management plans. The
requirements can differ or conflict for various areas of the state
and within specific sites. For example, an environmental goal is to
move large woody debris into streams to support fish habitat, but
in FEMA-regulated floodplains, this can trigger extensive analysis
to ensure there is not a rise in flood waters. This is an example of
the complex nature of multiple regulations that was addressed in
developing the EPP.
ODOT staff hurried to draft an initial version of the EPP in just over
a month by quickly organizing with state agencies, such as DEQ,
and federal agencies, such as the Forest Service and Bureau of
Land Management (BLM), for input on drafts. ODOT also
coordinated with regulatory agencies to obtain necessary permits
and clearances, and to bridge competing requirements.
September 7, 2020
Historic wildfire
event begins.
September 27,
2020
ODOT begins to
develop the Oregon
Wildfire DROP.
October 2, 2020
ODOT Environmental
Manager tapped to
lead EPP
development.
October 6, 2020
ODOT begins work
on EPP
development.
December 28, 2020
Fist iteration of the
EPP finalized.
December 30, 2020
DROP, version 1
published.
January 4, 2021
DROP/EPP training
held for Phase 2
personnel.
January 15, 2021
First hazardous tree
cut.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 28
Throughout initial drafting and after, ODOT worked with over 13
regulatory agencies to determine guidelines or obtain permits and
clearances for project requirements to incorporate into the plan.
For example:
• Within a few weeks, ODOT convened a workgroup with the
Forest Service, BLM, and the Oregon Parks and Recreation
Department to define a single set of leading management
practices for hazardous tree removal in scenic corridors, which
are regulated by overlapping laws and forest management
plans.
• ODOT staff coordinated with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Migratory Bird Treaty Act Office to clarify permit requirements
for the project to balance the safety concern of the hazardous
trees with protections for the birds.
• ODOT partnered with FEMA to hold meetings with tribal
governments, Forest Service and BLM archaeologists and
historians, and the State Historic Preservation Office, and
shared drafts with tribal governments and agencies for their
input on the protection of cultural and historic resources.
• ODOT worked with FEMA and the University of Oregon Museum
of Natural and Cultural History to gather cultural resource data
for the affected areas from federal and state agencies. The
data would be used to help flag known sensitive areas to avoid.
After the initial EPP draft, ODOT staff acquired additional time to
continue working on it. ODOT worked with partners and involve
additional stakeholders in further developing the plan. The agency
also shared drafts for review and input from key ODOT staff and a
contractor involved in the plan’s implementation. According to
agency staff, the first EPP was finalized on December 28, 2020.
The plan provides guidance for activities such as erosion and
sediment control, use of equipment, and vegetation clearing. It
also details many conditions and scenarios under which crews are
to delay or stop work to consult with ODOT staff and others such
as FEMA and Forest Service.
The EPP has continued to evolve. ODOT staff continued to update
the EPP to address unanticipated scenarios, changing conditions,
and feedback from the field. Since releasing the latest version in
March 2021, ODOT staff have issued additional supplemental
guidance.
March 10, 2021
EPP version 2
produced.
March 11, 2021
Interim email
guidance on fish log
request process
issued.
April 2, 2021
Interim email
guidance on large
wood in tributary
streams issued.
June 15, 2021
Interim email
guidance on
removal of large
trees issued.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 29
Cultural resource protection is one area of prominent focus in the EPP. Minimizing impacts to these
resources is critical for respecting the ancestral homelands of federally recognized tribes and the
shared history of Oregon lands. According to archeological consultants, the 2020 wildfires spanned
areas with roughly 300 resources known and uncovered in the field as crews worked to identify
hazardous trees and clear debris; see Figure 10.
Figure 10: Within the fire corridors, almost as many archeological resources were inadvertently discovered
as were previously recorded
Fire Corridor Previously Recorded
Archeological Resources
Inadvertent Discoveries of
Archeological Resources
Riverside 33 11
Beachie Creek/Lionshead 38 33
Holiday Farm 11 31
Archie Creek 36 26
Thielsen 5 3
2-4-2 43 37
South Obenchain 14 2
Totals 166 141
Note: Figures are as of August 15, 2021, and are subject to change as work continues.
Source: Historical Research Associates, Inc.
Consultants noted the fire areas included a wide variety of archaeological sites and artifacts, including
historic resources from as far back as the 1800s, such as railroad grades, wagon roads, and stone
foundations, and resources dating back several thousand years such as lithic tools, like arrowheads.
The EPP includes guidance and processes for archeological monitoring and discovery of potential
resources, and outlines procedures for preventing damage to resources such as stone tools, ceramics,
historical logging equipment, and foundations of structures.
From our communications with stakeholders involved in the recovery efforts, the majority felt their
input was adequately incorporated, and generally described the EPP as a document that provided
useful guidance for those in the field. Some noted the plan could use further refinements beyond the
updates made, and several recommended ODOT incorporate lessons learned into an updated version
for future disasters. Stakeholders from multiple regulatory agencies working with ODOT on developing
the EPP praised ODOT staff for their responsive and collaborative communication approach. Some
highlighted their longstanding effective partnership with ODOT, and commended staff’s openness to
change to make successful process improvements during recovery efforts.
ODOT staff, contractors, and consultants took efforts to ensure EPP guidance and
environmental permits were followed during the tree removal process
ODOT staff and its contractors and consultants put in measures to help obtain required permits and
ensure compliance with the EPP and project permits. These measures included: hiring environmental
consultants to map natural resource locations, training for tree cutting monitors and crew, holding
regular meetings, and having ODOT and consultant staff onsite while crews were cutting trees.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 30
Before tree cutting began, environmental monitors mapped and cataloged natural areas in the fire
corridors. They used a mapping tool and multiple data sources to identify and record the natural
resources in the areas. For cultural resources, archeological consultants said they worked closely with
ODOT, tribal monitors, and FEMA cultural staff to identify and safeguard cultural resources in the areas.
Both environmental and archeological consultants flagged buffers around sensitive areas, so cutters
could avoid dropping trees in these areas, and are on site to monitor tree cutting activities.
ODOT took efforts to ensure all staff involved in recovery efforts understood and adhered to the EPP’s
guidelines before and after work started. All contractors are contractually obligated to adhere to the
EPP. Before recovery efforts began in December 2020, ODOT staff stated they met with contractor
leadership to discuss the EPP requirements in detail, and later met with staff on how to apply the EPP
in the field. ODOT staff have also held weekly calls with FEMA, environmental and archeological
consultants, contractors, and the tribes to discuss developments in the field.
Prior to starting work, all ODOT staff, contractors, and monitors were also asked to take a training on
the DROP and cultural resources, which highlighted the importance of the EPP and discussed some of
the provisions. Environmental and archeological consultants are on site to assess conditions and meet
with cutting crews. Consultants point out flagged environmental and cultural resource areas, discuss
permit requirements, and any unusual circumstances. Typically, at least one environmental consultant
and an archaeologist was devoted to each fire corridor to ensure compliance with the EPP and
protection of cultural sites.
ODOT designated four regional environmental coordinators to act as the initial point of contact for
environmental consultants to offer guidance on implementation of EPP when questions or issues arise,
such as when a cultural site may be impacted. ODOT coordinators also work with regulatory agencies
and other ODOT staff as needed to ensure permits and clearance is obtained for ODOT projects.
Forest Service representatives that worked closely with ODOT staff described ODOT as effective at
making sure needed mitigations were taking place on the landscape and achieving cultural resource
protections. Multiple stakeholders described ODOT’s efforts to protect nesting birds as effective. A
tribal representative praised ODOT crew coordination in the field that resulted in cultural resource
discoveries.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 31
Stories in the Field
Peregrine Falcons
Tree removal crews paused work near the Big Cliff area of the highway along the Clackamas River to
allow its team of environmental experts to monitor a known bird nesting site. After three peregrine
chicks were found nesting in the cliffs, the tree cutting crews temporarily avoided that area of the
highway to stay out of the chicks’ line of site until they fledged.
Osprey
An osprey nest was found perched atop a dead, hazard tree ready to fall into the roadway. Over the
span of a week, crews worked with the Cascades Raptor Center to monitor, track osprey parent
behavior, and build a 150-foot pole mimicking the tree to safely relocate the nest.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 32
Red Breasted Sap Sucker
An active red breasted sap sucker nest was in a tree marked for removal on private property. It was
agreed to cut out part of the tree with the nest and attach it to another log 20 feet off the ground.
Source: Waferboard posted to Flickr, licensed CC BY 2.0
Protecting Cultural Resources
Heavy machinery is not allowed within flagged cultural site boundaries unless it is on paved or gravel
surfaces, or protective matting is placed under vehicle tires to minimize ground disturbance. Trees are
picked up and lifted off the ground surface to avoid dragging logs within cultural site boundaries.
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 33
Culturally Modified Trees (CMTs)
Indigenous people in the Pacific Northwest
both past and present modify trees for a
variety of different purposes, including the
collection of sap, production of textiles (e.g.,
basketry, hats, clothing), marking trails or
locations of cultural importance, and using
the cambium for food.
As of August 2021, 163 CMTs had been
identified in the project including those that
were previously recorded and relocated,
according to ODOT’s monitoring
consultants.
Within the 242 Fire area, ponderosa pine
CMTs are a common resource. ODOT’s
monitoring consultant teamed with the
Klamath Tribes to ensure that a tribal
monitor was present with arborists as trees
were being evaluated and marked as
hazards. The team effort resulted in the
identification of over a dozen previously
unidentified CMTs.
Source: National Park Service/K. Langley
Logs for Fish Habitat Improvement Project
ODOT transferred 30 to 40 large, dead conifer trees
removed in the Almeda Fire area to the Oregon Department
of Fish and Wildlife for use in a fish habitat improvement
project. Large logs in streams improve habitat for native
fish including salmon, trout, and steelhead and provide
cover for small fish from predators.
Source: BLM, posted to Flickr, licensed CC BY 2.0
Logs in Riparian Areas
ODOT left a number of cut hazard trees in riparian areas
and in uplands in both the Archie Creek and Thielsen Fire
corridors. Logs left in riparian areas, especially when felled
across small streams, improve fish habitat and logs left in
upland and riparian areas also provide habitat for a variety
of small mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. Further,
these logs release nutrients back to the soil as they
decompose.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 34
Question 4: What happens to the trees that ODOT had cut on or near
highway corridors?
Answer: ODOT has stored cut trees from its removal operations in the corridors since
operations started as the trees are the property of the landowner. Many of the trees cut
were from Forest Service lands. Under a newly developed process, ODOT will sell
hazardous trees removed from federal land.
While ODOT is to maintain safe and reliable transportation on state roads, the lands bordering the sides
of the roadways are often owned by other entities. Of the fire-damaged trees evaluated along state
highways, the vast majority of the hazardous trees are on private property or Forest Service public
lands, not on lands owned by the state or ODOT. When ODOT cuts a hazardous tree along the highway
corridors, as allowed by easement or state statute, that tree is not state property but belongs to the
landowner and is therefore the landowner’s responsibility to dispose of or sell. This is true for regular
highway maintenance as well as wildfire emergency efforts.
Figure 11 shows trees being cut during Phase 2 operations by ownership. These figures include trees
cut along the highways as well as on PPDR sites.
Figure 11: Majority of trees cut and planned to be cut were on private individual and Forest Service lands
Ownership Percent of Total
Individual Property Owners 44%
Forest Service 38%
BLM 8%
State Agencies (ODF, ODFW, ODSL, and OPRD) 6%
Private – Industry 2%
Local Government 1%
Other (US Army Corps of Engineers, PGE) Less than 1%
Note: Figures are as of August 19, 2021, and subject to change as work continues.
Source: ODOT and CDR data.
Forest Service and BLM have agreements with ODOT to help expedite timber sales
The scale of debris from this emergency was something the state and federal partners in the area had
not previously dealt with. ODOT stacked (decked) and stored marketable logs as part of its removal
operations. Logs have been decked in the fire corridors since the operations started, and much of that
timber is Forest Service and BLM property. Some corridors had limited space for decking all the logs.
After discussions, the Forest Service determined that ODOT would have more flexibility to sell the
trees quickly on the open market. In early 2021, ODOT began negotiating settlement sales with the
Forest Service and BLM to transfer title on logs cut on federal lands. ODOT completed property
transfer agreements by August 2021. The development of these agreements has taken some time due
to the unprecedented scale of the project and to ensure compliance with both state and federal
requirements.
Forest Service agreements with ODOT also included trees cut by utilities during the first phase of the
recovery in two fire corridors. These trees block or limit access to cut and process trees ODOT is
responsible for or could create future fire hazards adjacent to the highway system.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 35
The sale of trees from federal land is not intended to earn a profit
— money from the sales will offset tree removal costs. The initial
cost estimate for overall hazardous tree removal was $296 million.
We assessed the potential for profit with log sales using Riverside
as an example, as 95% of the logs in that area belong to the Forest
Service. In Riverside, the contractor’s cost estimate for hazardous
tree removal is over $70 million. The appraisal estimates the
market rate value of the marketable logs from Riverside at nearly
$1 million, or just 1.4% of the estimated cost of removal, without
factoring in the price ODOT will pay for the trees. The final value of
the logs will be determined when logs are actually sold and
removed from the corridor. If ODOT were to realize a profit on the
tree sales, any remaining proceeds would go to offset funds that
would otherwise be provided by FEMA before any cost sharing is
calculated.
In other fire corridors, ODOT is cutting a large number of trees on
private property that pose a threat to the highways or are
otherwise an imminent public threat. Although disposing of those
trees is the responsibility of the landowners, they may choose to
have ODOT remove the trees. In these instances, trees are
considered donations that ODOT can include in its sales if the
trees are marketable. Yet the number of donated trees will likely
come nowhere close to closing the gap between the overall value
of the wood and the cost to remove it, meaning revenues from
this cut timber will not cover costs.
ODOT has been processing slash and some non-
marketable timber into chips and seeking disposal
options
The hazardous tree removal effort, from emergency response and
recovery combined, involved so many trees that it created a lot of
slash. There were also non-marketable logs that were heavily
damaged and unusable for creating wood products. Contractors in
the field are processing some of these logs and the slash into
wood chips, but the sheer volume of chips is too much to remain in
the corridors.
ODOT had contractors spread wood chips on the forest floor to
the extent possible, which can vary depending on location. This
practice helps improve wildlife and riparian habitat, protect soils
from erosion, promote moisture retention in soil for replanting,
cover ground disturbed by tree removal activities, and reduce the
visual impacts of tree removal operations. ODOT’s instructions to
September 7, 2020
Responders begin
cutting and clearing
hazardous trees and
debris. Phase 1
hazardous trees
felled and
processed.
January 15, 2021
Phase 2 hazardous
trees felled and
processed.
February and
March 2021
ODOT begins
negotiating with
USFS and BLM for
salvage timber
purchase.
March 30, 2021
ODOT awards no-
costs contract for
Almeda fire woody
debris removal.
June 4, 2021
ODOT executes
contract with BLM
to purchase timber.
July 19, 2021
ODOT signs no-cost
agreement for
Archie Creek fire for
excess chip removal.
July 29, 2021
ODOT executes
contracts with USFS
to purchase timber.
August 23, 2021
ODOT advertises
first timber sale
from hazard tree
operations.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 36
contractors specify that no more than three inches of woody material should be left on the forest floor
after hazardous tree removal.
Left: Stack of decked logs.
Middle: Logs decked and ready for sale.
Right: Slash, woody debris such as treetops and limbs, is mostly processed into wood chips.
After operations began around the state, ODOT recognized there is too much material to safely spread
on the forest floor, creating a possible future fire hazard. As a result, ODOT entered into two
agreements, one with a biofuel facility and one with a wood products manufacturer, to remove some of
the excess chip material at no cost to the state: one from the Almeda Fire corridor and the other from
the Archie Creek Fire. As of September 2021, ODOT is looking for similar opportunities with other
entities to productively use the wood chips. Otherwise, ODOT may need to burn the excess chips
remaining in the corridors.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 37
Question 5: What mechanisms are in place for evaluating the
recovery efforts? (e.g., after action reports for continuous
improvement mechanisms and capturing lessons learned)
Answer: The Governor’s Office completed an after action review of emergency
response efforts but there is no solidified plan for a state-level review of the recovery
effort. However, ODOT intends to hire a consultant to conduct an after action review
on debris removal operations, one part of the state’s recovery efforts. ODOT
management recognizes there are areas for improvement, and we identified some
additional areas that should be considered in future planning efforts.
ODOT is laying the work for better debris removal operations in future disasters
Any emergency response and recovery
should have a period of reflection to look
over the actions taken and adjust plans to
be better prepared for the next event.
Oregon’s 2020 wildfires, and the scale of
debris removal executed by the state,
were unprecedented. Much of the planning
and work was done in a rapid timeframe
with staff who had little to no prior
experience with disaster debris
management. Lessons learned from the
experience should be carried forward for
future preparedness efforts, which include
planning, training, and exercising, to better
respond and recover from disasters. This
ongoing emergency management cycle is
depicted in Figure 12.
The Governor’s Office completed an after action review of emergency response and initial recovery in
May 2021. As of the beginning of October 2021, there is no solidified plan for a state-level after action
review of the full recovery effort. However, ODOT intends to conduct one for debris removal
operations. In our discussions with those involved with debris cleanup, they recognized areas for
improvement, such as:
Exercising state plans to improve planning and preparedness: Oregon’s 2018 Disaster Recovery
Plan
20 had never been exercised, and the state’s 2015 Debris Management Plan covered basic policy
20 State of Oregon Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (CEMP), Volume IV – State Recovery Plan, March 2018.
Preparedness
ResponseRecovery
Mitigation
Figure 12: The four phases of emergency management
operate as a cycle
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 38
but not operations. As a result,21,22 the state plans contained little about the Disaster Management Task
Force, which turned out to be a key group for the recovery effort. Key task force members met for the
first time during the incident and had to identify and learn quickly about debris management, their roles
and responsibilities, and navigate large policy decisions during an emergency response.
ICS training for ODOT staff: ODOT plans to identify a core group of people to retain the knowledge
gained from the September 2020 wildfires and train them to be ready for recovery work in future
emergencies. The May 2021 after action report, which looked at lessons learned early in the wildfire
response, noted that people staffing emergency support functions are rarely activated to support
operations in Oregon’s Emergency Coordination Center. As a result, they struggled to integrate into
the Incident Command System structure and planning process. ODOT could further consider its
approach to ICS training and exercising for employees to better ready the agency to respond to
emergency incidents.
Precontracting disaster debris monitoring and removal: Other states have contracts in place prior to
the disaster (precontracts) for debris removal services, allowing operations to start as soon as it is safe
to conduct work. Having firms precontracted allows the state to involve those firms in annual planning
work to prepare to respond quickly when disasters occur. Oregon did not have firms retained. ODOT
leadership and stakeholders both suggested precontracting and developing contract templates ahead
of time. ODOT leadership reported that its procurement team is researching contacts in other states to
discuss precontracting later this fall.
Staggering contract start times: Recovery operations of this nature requires some contractor work to
be done ahead of other work. For example, assessing and marking hazardous trees must be done
before cutting crews can remove trees. ODOT recognized it would be better to stagger the timing of
contracts so that preliminary work like asbestos testing and tagging trees is done before cutting crews
arrive.
Allocating field operations staff to the fire corridors differently: ODOT split its field operations into
north and south branches. In hindsight, ODOT management said they should have further split the
north branch to better allocate the resources required to manage the large northern fire corridors.
Codifying Right-of-Entry process: Navigating the legal right-of-entry to properties complicated
recovery efforts. After disasters, property owners can move debris to public rights of way for
responders to pick up. FEMA’s own guidance assumes property owners will move debris to public
spaces. However, wildfires leave behind dangerous hazardous waste on private property making it
unsafe to cleanup without protective equipment and proper disposal methods. The state’s existing
21 Planners were brought to Oregon through the Emergency Management Assistance Compact, a national mutual aid system.
22 Our 2018 audit report, “The State Must Do More to Prepare Oregon for a Catastrophic Disaster,” Report 2018-03, found the
state needed to do more to prepare, including completing and implementing critical plans, fulfilling minimum standards for an
effective emergency management program, and adequately staffing the agency charged with coordinating emergency
management efforts.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 39
Debris Management Plan did not consider legal issues surrounding rights of entry to properties needed
for cleanup efforts.
Maintaining procedures and protocols: ODOT hurried to develop the Debris Removal Operations Plan,
the EPP, and hazard tree removal criteria in the aftermath of the wildfires. Stakeholders reported that
the EPP needs refinement beyond the updates incorporated to-date, and they would like to see a plan
that has been vetted and approved by all agencies and tribal nations before the next debris-generating
event.
ODOT management stated they plan to hire a consultant this fall to facilitate the after action process
and produce interim and final reports, which will be made public.23 We were told that the after action
reports will examine all areas of debris mission planning, including permitting and clearances, and
processes around insurance recovery and FEMA reimbursement. Revising plans and preparing for the
next disaster are key reasons to produce an after action report.
24 The consultant will also assist the
state with updating plans and other documents. ODOT’s goal is to have a useful product to inform pre-
disaster planning efforts and contracts for spring or summer of 2022, but a final report may take longer
given the lengthy processes around insurance recovery and FEMA reimbursement.
ODOT could consider additional areas to help improve debris removal operations
Given the state’s inexperience with recovery operations and debris management, we expect there will
be many lessons to learn from this experience. An in-depth examination of these topics is out of the
scope of work for this report, but they could be addressed in after action reports and improvement
plans.25
Quality control documentation: CDR did not have an established method for tracking the quality
control process for hazardous trees, so MB&G initially used maps then later notes and spreadsheets to
track and manage efforts along the way. However, there was not reliable or comprehensive data
maintained to ensure damaged trees had a complete review.
Internal and cross-stakeholder coordination and communications: Internal communication and the
coordination between many different jurisdictions and contractors is an area that can often be
improved upon, especially when there are multiple layers and parties involved during an emergency
operation. Stakeholders commented on instances of disconnected communications and information
not being disseminated in a timely manner. We also heard some concerns from counties about not
23 In 2003, Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 established that a single, comprehensive approach to domestic incident
management – the National Incident Management System (NIMS) – to ensure that all levels of government have the capability to
work efficiently and effectively together. Under NIMS, a primary function of the incident commander is to ensure that after
action reports are completed.
24 In its January 2021 report, Oregon’s Wildfire Economic Recovery Council recommended a review of the state recovery plan and
debris management plan. SB 762, which passed during the 2021 Legislative session, requires the Office of Emergency
Management to update Oregon’s statewide emergency plan to prepare for or respond to wildfire emergencies.
25 After action reports and improvement plans include an overview of an emergency event or preparedness exercise, an analysis
of capabilities, and a list of corrective actions.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 40
having accurate and timely information on where PPDR operations were occurring for people in the
PPDR program.
Staff, contractors, and monitors training: We reviewed the training required of all ODOT staff,
contractors, and monitors assigned to recovery efforts prior to starting work. The training covers the
Debris Removal Operations Plan and cultural resources but contains little information on protecting
environmental resources. Revising the training to cover both cultural and environmental protections
and adding an assessment in lieu of a self-attestation of completion, may reduce the risk of contractors
not understanding key concepts or protection regulations.
Cultural resource surveys: Stakeholders suggested conducting surveys of sites where cultural
resources were likely to be discovered, ahead of debris removal work and in addition to the site
monitoring during operations. Stakeholders also commented on the cultural resources data, noting
there were issues with the accuracy and reliability of the data. As of August 15, 2021, field crews have
inadvertently discovered nearly as many new sites as were previously known. Conducting surveys
ahead of cutting crews could help prevent work stoppages when inadvertent resources are discovered.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 41
Project Approach
This advisory project was conducted to address concerns about ODOT hazardous tree removal
operations. This report resulted from a research-based project conducted by state auditors.
We spoke or corresponded with state employees, contractors, and stakeholders involved in debris
removal, specifically for hazardous trees, including:
• management and staff on the wildfire recovery crew from ODOT;
• management, staff, and prior staff from the contracted project monitor (CDR Maguire);
• managers and staff from the consulting firms (AC Disaster Consulting, LLC; Mason,
Bruce, & Girard, Inc.; Maul Foster & Alongi, Inc.; and Historical Research Associates, Inc.);
• management with OEM and DEQ;
• Oregon’s Wildfire Recovery Director;
• Oregon Senator Jeff Golden;
• representatives from the Forest Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
• representatives from the BLM;
• environmental specialists from FEMA;
• an independent reviewer of ODOT’s hazardous tree operation;
• members of two Oregon’s tribal nations;
• Public Works, Road Maintenance, and Solid Waste managers from counties within the
fire corridors;
• staff from the Oregon State Historic Preservation Office; and
• Oregonians concerned with hazardous tree removal operations.
We reviewed state laws and rules for emergency recovery, the Oregon Debris Management Plan within
the State of Oregon Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, 2020 wildfire emergency
declarations, testimony during hearings of the Oregon House Special Committee on Wildfire Recovery
and Oregon Senate Committee on Natural Resources and Wildfire Recovery, recovery presentations
and updates, the Governor’s Wildfire Economic Recovery Council report, an after action report on the
response to the 2020 wildfires, and FEMA materials (e.g., frameworks, debris management guidance,
public assistance program information).
Specific to ODOT’s debris removal operations, we reviewed its forester reports, contracts and related
materials for hazardous tree contractors, Debris Removal Operations Plan (including the EPP), debris
management tree assessment field guides, debris management quality control program procedures,
contracted independent report on its hazardous tree operation, chip and woody debris agreements,
and timber sale contracts. We also reviewed daily incident action plans for debris recovery operations.
We conducted site visits in June 2021 through the three largest fire corridors: Beachie
Creek/Lionshead, Holiday Farm, and Riverside. During our visits, we spoke with ODOT on scene incident
commanders and, as available, contractors and monitoring staff.
We reviewed wildfire cleanup website information and data provided by ODOT and CDR that tracked
hazardous tree removal operations. Based on interviews, the data appeared to be reasonable and
sufficient for our purposes, but we did not test the reliability of the hazardous tree removal data.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-30 | October 2021 | page 42
Lastly, we reviewed the online training provided to recovery participants (ODOT staff, contractors,
monitors).
Our limited review did not include evaluating the adequacy of the criteria used to evaluate whether a
tree was hazardous, testing the application of the hazardous tree removal criteria or the effectiveness
of natural and cultural resource protections to be in place. Further, the scope of our review did not
include reviewing the easements between utility companies and federal entities or private landowners.
We chose to perform this work as a non-audit project to produce this advisory report quickly and
timely to be as useful as possible. Accordingly, this report does not adhere to the full set of
government auditing standards. This advisory report has undergone the same rigorous quality
assurance process as does each audit from the Oregon Audits Division, with auditors not involved in
the project checking evidence for each assertion in the report. We also consulted with ODOT leadership
prior to initiating the project, provided the agency with a copy of the report, and gave them the
opportunity to provide feedback.
We would like to thank ODOT management and staff for their cooperation as well as the many
consultants and participants in the recovery efforts that provided their time and information to us for
this project.
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor
of Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected
Secretary of State and is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
branches of Oregon government. The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers,
agencies, boards and commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Audit team
Ian Green, MS Econ., CGAP, CGAP, CFE, CISA, Audit Manager
Karen Peterson, Lead Auditor
Amelia Eveland, MBA, Lead Auditor
Krystine McCants, CIA, MS Econ., Principal Auditor
Kathy Scott, DrPH, Staff Auditor
Ariana Denney, MPA, Staff Auditor
Zak Ostertag, MPP, Staff Auditor
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 43
Appendix A: Oregon Wildfire Recovery Organizational Chart
Source: Governor’s Wildfire Economic Recovery Council report, January 2021.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 44
Appendix B: Debris Cleanup Organizational Chart
Appendix B: Debris Cleanup Organizational Chart
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
ODOT On Scene
Incident
Commander
Debris Management Task Force (DMTF)
Governor
Wildfire Recovery Director
(Mid-Oct. 2020 )
Oregon Department of Transportation
(SRF 6 – Infrastructure Systems)
Department of Environmental
Quality (SRF 7 – Natural and
cultural Resources)
Office of
Emergency
Management
ODOT Area Command
ODOT Wildfire
Recovery Crew  Owners Representative
Consultant (ACDC)
ODOT North Operations
(Clackamas, Lane, Linn,
Lincoln, Marion Counties)
ODOT South Operations
(Douglas, Jackson, Klamath
Counties)
FEMA
Infrastructure
Branch (Public
Assistance)
Prime Contractors
(Suulutaaq, Ceres, ECC,
K&E, AshBritt)
Wildfire Economic
Recovery Council
(Oct – Dec 2020)
Monitoring Firm
Consultant (CDR)
Monitoring Firm
Consultant
(MB&G)
Monitoring Firm
Consultant
Monitoring Firm
Consultant
Monitoring Firm
Arborists (CDR)
US Army Core
of Engineers
(USACE)
PPDR
Subcontractors
Tree Service
Subcontractors
Governor’s Disaster
Cabinet
(Sept. 2020 - ongoing) Legal Council for FEMA
Reimbursements
(Baker Donaldson)
US
Environmental
Protection
Agency (EPA)
Counties
Almeda
Phoenix/Talent
Archie Creek
(Hwy 138E)
Holiday Farm
(Hwy 126)
Echo Mt.
(Hwy 18)
Beachie Creek/Lionshead
(Hwy 22)
2-4-2
(Hwy 97/Hwy 62)
Riverside
(Hwy 224)
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 45
Appendix C: Recovery Photos
ODOT photos of private property debris removal and right-of-way hazardous tree removal.26
26 Additional photos of ODOT’s 2020 wildfire response and recovery are available on the agency’s Flickr account.
Before (top) and after (bottom) photos from Kane’s Marina in Detroit, Oregon. According to ODOT, the marina is a major economic
development and tourism driver for the area. The Debris Management Task Force was able to work with the local community to help
re-open the area by Memorial Day 2021. | Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 46
Before (top) and after (bottom) photos the Private Property Debris Removal work done at Salmon Mobile Home Park in Otis,
Oregon. | Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 47
Top: An aerial photo of the right-of-way work zone in Beachie Creek/Lionshead fire corridor.
Bottom left: Property designated free of household hazardous waste and ready for ash and debris cleanup.
Bottom right: Ash and debris along Highway 22.
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 48
Top: An aerial photo of the Holiday Farm right-of-way work zone.
Bottom left: Crews in personal protective gear gather samples to test for asbestos. Upon clear results, crews will mobilize to begin
ash and debris removal.
Bottom right: Crews remove ash and debris from Bear Lake Estates Mobile Home Park in Phoenix, OR.
Source: ODOT
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 49
Appendix D: Invoice Documentation
The documentation for hazardous tree removal is immense. There were over 500 pages of
documentation for one day of a tree service contractor’s work in one fire corridor. This appendix shows
supporting documentation for one tree cut and one load hauled on February 16, 2020.
Documentation for a cut tree
As the documentation shows, on January 28, 2021, contractors took two pictures of a big leaf maple
tree in the right-of-way work zone on the Holiday Farm Fire. One picture shows the tree painted for
removal and the barcode attached to the tree, and a second photo shows the measured diameter of
the tree. When the tree was cut on February 16, 2021, a printed cut ticket was created, and contractors
took a third photo showing the remaining tree stump. The contractor logs the ticket number and bar
code of the tree in a monitoring log for the day. The information for each tree is also entered into a
table containing 17 columns of information about each tree.
Source: ODOT.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 50
Source: ODOT.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2021-23 | October 2021 | page 51
Documentation for a load hauled
Tree service contractors also submit documentation for hauling
the cut logs to be processed. Each load hauled receives a printed
load ticket. The loads are also noted in a monitoring log. The load
hauling information is also entered into a 26-column table of
information about each load hauled.
Source: ODOT.
October 7, 2021
ODOT Debris Management Task Force Management Response to “Advisory Report: ODOT
Worked Quickly to Oversee the Largest Wildfire Debris Removal Operation in State History ”
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE FROM:
-Mac Lynde, ODOT Deputy Administrator, Delivery & Operations Division;
-Frank Reading, ODOT Wildfire Cleanup Area Commander, Debris Management Task Force
The 2020 September wildfires serve as one of Oregon’s most devastating disasters, burning more than one
million acres, destroying thousands of homes, and claiming the lives of nine Oregonians. Following these
tragic events, Oregon communities were confronted with an immediate need to remove the structural debris
left behind and more than one hundred thousand fire-damaged, dead trees blocking roads and interfering
with rebuilding and recovery efforts.
Providing the critical first step for helping these communities rebuild, the Oregon Governor’s Office and the
Wildfire Economic Recovery Council created the Debris Management Task Force (Task Force)—led by
ODOT for its contract management expertise—to immediately begin work clearing the aftermath of these
fires, and significant, unprecedented progress continues today. Ahead of the initial eighteen-month schedule,
90% of home sites have been cleared, 70% of hazard trees have been cut or removed, and communities have
started rebuilding and moving forward with next steps in their multi-year recovery process.
As an emergency response operation built to adapt and change over time, the work of the Task Force has
remained nimble and has evolved to respond to the critical needs of wildfire survivors, operational
discoveries in the field, emergency management best practices, and important Oregon values such as
community safety, local jobs, a diverse workforce, and environmental stewardship.
Earlier this year, as progress ramped up and emergency recovery work was more visible in communities,
questions were raised specifically about hazard tree removal, the criteria used to determine which trees posed
safety threats, and the qualifications of the crews making decisions. To further investigate, ODOT sought out
the assistance of an experienced independent forester and arborist with in-depth hazard tree expertise to
review this work and make any potential recommendations. The findings from this report provided an ‘A’
grade to the operation underway and suggested that no substantive changes be made.
To further investigate as requested by ODOT, this initial review provided context and background for the
Secretary of State Audits Division to conduct a supplemental independent, multi-month review. ODOT and
the Task Force appreciate the findings of this review and emphasize the descriptions provided that highlight
the complex and unprecedented nature of the hazard tree removal process.
In response to the advisory report
Throughout, ODOT and the Task Force have appreciated and welcomed the engaged participation of public
officials, legislative partners, community and advocacy organizations, wildfire survivors and others to inform
and guide this work. When this work began, there was no detailed playbook available for Oregon, but we all
came together to efficiently and collaboratively develop a blueprint that can be both carried forward, and
revised and improved upon as necessary, for years to come in the event of future disasters.
In response to specific items included in the review, we appreciate both the comprehensive story that was
shared outlining the details of this complex operation, and the thorough and comprehensive analysis,
Department of Transportation
Office of the Director
355 Capitol St NE
Salem, OR  97301
acknowledging that emergency response work will always exist as an iterative and evolving process. The
review also serves as a definitive summary of the massive undertaking accomplished to date to provide the
critical first step towards recovery for Oregon’s fire-impacted communities. In the spirit of continuous
improvement, we support and agree with the opportunities listed in the report and elaborate further below:
• Future planning: Much has been accomplished for Oregon thus far, and we want to build on
successes and lessons learned even further in the event of another disaster. This work leveraged a
broad range of expertise and state and federally required plans to structure and guide operations,
navigate regulatory frameworks, protect the environment and culturally sensitive areas, and manage
teams. While no single framework for an event of this scope and magnitude existed previously, the
past year has provided many lessons to incorporate into an extensive After Action Review process
and report for future planning efforts. We look forward to ongoing collaborative discussions as we
plan ahead and reflect.
• Training and documentation: Due to an immediate and urgent need, the training of more than
1,200 contractors, crews, and staff occurred simultaneously in real-time, while documenting the many
items required for federal reimbursement, and while also delivering an emergency response operation
in the field. In turn, this experience has provided a checklist for responding to and addressing similar
events. The past year has identified key areas for targeted training opportunities for all crews,
including ongoing training for implementing project-specific Environmental Protection Plans which
remains a top priority and opportunity for improvement.
• Delivering Oregon values and an equitable workforce: Embracing an “Oregon helping Oregon”
approach, we are proud that our contracting process reflected a strong commitment to Oregon
values, a diverse workforce, and providing equitable contracting opportunities to a range of
businesses. This includes building a team of contractors that delivered nearly a thousand local
Oregon jobs, formed an equitable and diverse workforce, and provided training and apprenticeship
opportunities for traditionally underserved communities.
• Contractor capacity and pre-contracting: For future events, having a “bench” of contractors—
and Oregon-based contractors now skilled in this type of emergency response work—to call upon
will serve the state well going forward. With this infrastructure now in place, we look forward to
applying this system for future rapid response when necessary and appreciate the outreach work
contracting staff undertook to bring new and underserved businesses into the operation.
Additionally, best practices for oversight and accountability for overseeing such a massive contract
administration effort were developed. Having created this framework from scratch, Oregon will now
have the benefit of pre-planning for next time and having contractors ready to go pre-disaster.
• Organizational development and field operation staffing: Standing up an operation of more
than a thousand crew members, more than a hundred contracts, and recruiting a core leadership team
required quickly developing an organizational structure that could adapt along the way. This also
required a need to recruit top talent quickly, taking many staff away from their regular positions for
an extended period of time. Similar to having a bench of contractors on-call and available, having a
dedicated team versed in Incident Command training, and processes and procedures in place for the
next event, will be critical for future success.
• Coordination and information flow amongst stakeholders and jurisdictions: Internal
coordination and communication is a critical part of any emergency response operation. To be
expected—given the large number of state and federal agencies, contractors, statewide recovery staff,
county partners and others working towards a common cause at the same time—a brief period of
creating structure and finding the right “glue” for the most effective internal communication
channels was navigated and explored.
As a state-managed, locally-coordinated operation, there were instances where coordination and the
flow of operational information could have been improved between and amongst state staff, local
public officials, and field crews. After some initial challenges, however, a cadence was developed as
the correct stakeholders were plugged into relevant meetings, and as processes and expectations were
implemented ensuring that information was shared from briefings and then dispersed widely to local
stakeholders— from weekly coordination meetings, presentations, proactive calls from the call center
hotline, and the large volume of external communication channels provided digitally, in-person, and
by mail. Once stakeholders tuned into the operation, learned more about and became comfortable
with the many coordination tools at their disposal, a rhythm was established, and statewide
stakeholder coordination and communication improved.
The unfortunate reality that Oregon may experience another devastating wildfire event in coming years is not
taken lightly. Looking forward, we invite future discussions and look forward to input and feedback that
balances a range of perspectives rooted in safety and recovery to further guide all statewide emergency
response planning. As this work continues to wind down, we will continue to both solicit and apply lessons
learned, and also investigate or take corrective action in response to any concerns that may arise.
We want to sincerely thank Oregonians for their collaboration, grit and resilient spirit. Together, this work
has helped reopen schools, summer camps, local businesses, fish hatcheries and recreation areas. It has
cleared the way for rebuilding new lives and housing options and kept highways open and free of falling trees
and other debris while providing wood for habitat, conservation projects and energy programs. Cleanup work
has strived to equitably provide Oregon jobs while ultimately making sure that no more lives are lost to the
2020 wildfires.
We know that there are always opportunities for improvement, and we will continue to build these lessons
learned into all facets of our work for next time. While we sincerely hope that Oregon never relives this
traumatic experience, ODOT and the Task Force stand ready to help and we were honored to be called upon
during Oregon’s time of need.
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Front and back picture courtesy of ODOT