Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Depar
tment of Consumer and Business Services
350 Winter St. NE
Salem, OR 97309
Page i
Table of Contents
FINANCIAL SECTION:  Page
I. INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 1
II. BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
a. Balance Sheet 3
b. Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balance 4
c. Notes to the Basic Financial Statements 5
III. Other Reports:
a. Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance 10
and  Other Matters
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor’s Report
Th
e Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
Andrew Stolfi, Director, Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services
R
eport on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance
Marketplace, a program of the Department of Consumer and Business Services, State of
Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2020, and the related notes to the financial
statements, as listed in the table of contents.
M
anagement’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial
statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal
control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
A
uditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement.
A
n audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s
judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial
statements, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor
considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the
financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of
the entity’s internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also
includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements.
W
e believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for our audit opinion.
O
pinion
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the respective financial position of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace, a
program of the Department of Consumer and Business Services, State of Oregon, as of
June 30, 2020, and the respective changes in financial position thereof for the year then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
E
mphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance
Marketplace, a program of the Department of Consumer and Business Services, State of
Oregon, are intended to present the financial position and the changes in financial
position of only that portion of the Department of Consumer and Business Services that is
attributable to the transactions of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace. They do not
purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the State of Oregon or the
Department of Consumer and Business Services as of June 30, 2020, or the changes in its
financial position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.  Our opinion is not modified with
respect to this matter.
O
ther Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated
January 15, 2021, on our consideration of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace’s
internal control over financial reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and other matters. The
purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over
financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an
opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace’s internal
control over financial reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral part of an
audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the
Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace’s internal control over financial reporting and
compliance.
S
tate of Oregon
January 15, 2021
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
B
alance Sheet
Governmental Fund
June 30, 2020
ASSETS 2020
Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 8,469,938
Accounts Receivable 266,682
Total Assets $ 8,736,620
LIABILITIES AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Accounts Payable $ 1,383
Due to Other Funds 162,386
Other Current Liabilities 92,652
Total Liabilities 256,421
Fund Balance:
Restricted for Health Insurance Marketplace 8,480,199
Total Fund Balance 8,480,199
Total Liabilities, and Fund Balance $ 8,736,620
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
T
HE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
S
tatement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balance
Governmental Fund
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Revenues: 2020
Assessments $ 6,686,233
Interest and Investments 204,946
Other Revenue 185
Total Revenues 6,891,364
Expenditures:
Current:
Salaries and Wages 2,471,121
Services and Supplies 3,715,461
Special Payments 626,628
Capital Outlay 24,746
Total Expenditures 6,837,956
Excess (Deficiency) of Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures 53,408
Net Change in Fund Balance 53,408
Fund Balances - Beginning 8,426,791
Fund Balances - Ending $ 8,480,199
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
N
otes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
A – Purpose of Organization
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 required each state to establish
a health insurance marketplace, an online marketplace that enables individuals and employers
to shop, compare plans, and access financial assistance to help pay for insurance coverage.
States were permitted to implement their own marketplaces (referred to as state- based
marketplaces or SBMs) , choose to have a hybrid marketplace (referred to as state- based
marketplaces using the federal platform or SBM-FPs), or states could elect to participate in the
federal marketplace (referred to as the federally facilitated marketplace or FFM). Oregon first
elected to implement a  state-based marketplace to meet the unique needs of Oregonians and
its insurance market. In late 2014, Oregon transitioned into a SBM-FP.
In 2011, Senate Bill 99 established the Oregon Health Insurance Exchange Corporation (Cover
Oregon) as a public corporation to be governed by a board of directors. Upon implementation,
Cover Oregon was fully dependent on federal grant funding for its operational expenditures
through Dec. 31, 2014, and partially thereafter.
In 2015, SB 1 abolished Cover Oregon and its board of directors, and transferred its duties,
functions, and powers to the Department of Consumer and Business Services (DCBS), an
existing state agency. The SBM -FP, within DCBS  – Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
(OHIM) – currently is fully self-funded, using per-member-per-month (PMPM) assessments for
operations. These financial statements are representative of OHIM  only, a program within
DCBS.
SB 1 also established the Health Insurance Exchange Fund , also known as the Marketplace
Fund. Oregon Revised Statute 741 restricts the use of these funds to the operation of OHIM.
The Marketplace Fund is a special revenue fund that is used to account for and report the
proceeds of specific revenue sources that are restricted or co mmitted to expenditure for
specified purposes other than debt service or capital projects. The activities of this fund are rolled
up into the Consumer Protection special revenue fund for the statewide financial reporting
purposes.
B – Basis of Accounting
The accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace are
reported using the current financial resources measurement focus and the modified accrual
basis of accounting. These financial statements have been prepared in conformity with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the United States of America for governmental funds.
Revenues are recognized when they are both measurable and available. Revenues are
considered available when they are collectible within the current year or soon enough thereafter
to pay liabilities existing at the end of the year. For this purpose, revenues are considered
available if they are collected within 90 days  of the end of the current fiscal year. Expenditures
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
N
otes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
generally are recognized when a liability is incurred, as under accrual accounting. Revenues for
OHIM come from PMPM assessments from insurance carriers that participate in the OHIM
program.
Accordingly, revenues are recorded when earned, and expenditures are recorded when a liability
is incurred, regardless of when cash was received or paid.
C – Deposits and Investments
C
ash deposits that are held in a cash management or investment pool are classified as cash
and cash equivalents when the pool has the general characteristics of a demand deposit
account. Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and investments held by the office of the
State Treasurer in the Oregon Short Term Fund (OSTF). Additional information about the OSTF
can be found in the OSTF financial statements at
https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/public-financial-services/oregon-short-term-
funds/pages/default.aspx
D – Receivables & Payables
R
eceivables consist of revenues earned or accrued in the current period and are shown net of
estimated uncollectable accounts. Payables consist of amounts owed to vendors for operational
expenditures and other state agencies for services received.
E
– Use of Estimates
OH
IM used estimates and assumptions in preparing financial statements in accordance with
GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements required management to make certain
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenditures  during the
reporting period. As such, actual results could differ from the estimates included in the
accompanying financial statements.
F
–Fund Balance
T
he difference between assets and liabilities, plus deferred inflows of resources, is labeled “Fund
Balance” on the financial statements. The Health Insurance Exchange Fund balance is
restricted. Restricted fund balances are the result of constraints imposed by the law through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation or by parties outside state government, such as
creditors, grantors, contributions, or laws or regulations of other governments.
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
N
otes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Note 2 – Deposits and Investments
OHIM Participation in the Oregon Short Term Fund Held at Treasury
The Oregon State Treasury  maintains the Oregon Short -Term Fund (OSTF), a cash and
investment pool that is available for use by the Marketplace Fund. Because the pool operates
as a demand deposit account, the Marketplace Fund  portion of the OSTF is classified on the
financial statements as cash and cash equivalents.
Custodial Credit Risk for Deposits
T
he custodial credit risk for deposits  is the risk that, in the event of a depository financial
institution failure, OHIM will not be able to recover deposits that are in the possession of an
outside party. OHIM  does not hold any deposit s or investments outside of the Oregon State
Treasury. Deposits held by the Oregon State Treasury are either insured or collateralized under
the Public Funds Collateralization Program.  For more information, refer to the Oregon State
Treasury financial statements at  https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/news-data/pages/treasury-
news-reports.aspx Banking regulations and Oregon law establish the insurance and collateral
requirements for deposits in the OSTF.
The OHIM bank balance at the Oregon State Treasury was $8,145,781 as of June 30, 2020.
Investments
OHIM has investments only in OSTF held by the Oregon State Treasury.
Note 3 – Receivables and Payables
R
eceivables
The following table disaggregates receivable balances reported in the financial statements as
accounts and other receivables at June 30, 2020.
Receivables
Governmental Activities T otal
Insurer assessment receivable $ 254,682         166,046          420,728
Allowance for doubtful accounts (166,046) (166,046)
McGuireWoods Reimbursement 12,000 12,000
Total Receivable, net $ 266,682         -  266,682
Accounts
Receivable
Other
Receivable
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
N
otes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Payables
The following table disaggregates payable balances reported in the financial statements as
accounts payable and other current liabilities at June 30, 2020.
Note 4 – Risk Management
OHIM is subject to the risk of loss from various events, including, but not limited to, natural
disasters, destruction of assets, errors, omission, and injuries to employees. To mitigate the risk
of loss from various events, OHIM  participates in and is  covered under the State of Oregon’s
self-insurance and commercial insurance program as administered by the Department of
Administration Services  (DAS) Enterprise Goods and Services Division, Risk Management
Section. As such, OHIM  is responsible to provide updated property, equipment, and fixture
values to DAS Risk Management.
Note 5 – Assessment Revenue
Each year by March 31, the per-member-per-month medical and dental assessment rates need
to be set for qualified health plans sold through the federal exchange. The rates are set to cover
OHIM’s planned expenditures for that plan year.  There is a risk to assessment revenues fro m
federal or legal actions that may reduce enrollment in qualified health plans.  In calendar year
2016, the medical and dental rates were $9.66 and 97 cents, respectively. In calendar year 2017,
the medical and dental rates were reduced to $6.00 and 57 cents, respectively, due to reductions
in expenditures. For calendar years 2018 and 2019, the rates remained the same at $6.00 and
57 cents. For calendar year 2020, the rates will be reduced to $5.50 for medical and 36 cents
for dental. For calendar year 2021, the rates will remain at $5.50 for medical and 36 cents for
dental.
Note 6 – Insurance Providers Rebate
Oregon Revised S tatute (ORS) 741.105(3)(b) limits OHIM ’s fund balance to six months of
expenditures. Anything beyond six months of expenditures will be credited to insurers in a
manner described in Oregon Administrative R ule (OAR) 945-030-0020. The distribution of the
credit is based on the billing date and billed amounts during the 2017-19 biennium for firms that
were offering plans through the end of  the biennium. The monthly credit is the total rebate , per
insurer, divided over 12 months. The 2019- 21 biennium total rebate for insurance providers is
$4,163,014.75.  Of the total 2019- 21 biennium rebate, $2,081,514.00 was for January through
June of FY2020.
Payables
Governmental Activities Total
General Operation $ 1,383              38,346            39,729
Special Payment -  54,306            54,306
Total Payable $ 1,383              92,652            94,035
Accounts
Payable
Other Current
Liabilities
THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE (OHIM)
N
otes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2020
Not
e 7 – Fund Sweep
I
n 2019, the Oregon Legislature passed House Bill 2377. Section 5 of the bill requires the OHIM
to transfer $3,800,000.00 to the State of Oregon General Fund on May 31, 2021.
Note 8 – Proposed Transfer of OHIM program to the Oregon Health Authority
(OHA)
DCBS has submitted its 2021-23 Agency Request Budget (ARB), which includes policy package
No. 103 HIM transfer to OHA . Policy package No. 103 recommends  the transfer of the OHIM
program and its resources and liabilities to OHA. If approved by the 2021 Legislature, a project
manager from each agency will be appointed to develop a project plan, including timeline for
planning and implementation. There are no changes in services to the public if the transfer is
complete. This policy proposal has not yet been adopted by the legislature at the time of issuing
these financial statements.
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on
Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed
in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
Andrew Stolfi, Director, Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the
financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace (OHIM), a program of the
Department of Consumer and Business Services (the department), State of Oregon, as of
and for the year ended June 30, 2020, and the related notes to the financial statements,
which collectively comprise OHIM’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report
thereon dated January 15, 2021.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the
department’s internal control over financial reporting for OHIM to determine the audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our
opinion on the financial statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the department’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an
opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s internal control.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not
allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned
functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material
weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there
is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements
will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is
a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a
material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with
governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first
paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control
that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations,
during our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control that we consider to
be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses may exist that have not been
identified.
Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the OHIM’s financial statements
are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which
could have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts.
However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of
our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The results of our tests
disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported
under Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control
and compliance and the result of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part
of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the
entity’s internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for
any other purpose.
S
tate of Oregon
January 15, 2021