Stat
e of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
A
n Investment Pool of the State of Oregon
F
inancial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
This page intentionally left blank
OREG
ON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................... 1-2
Financial Statements:
Statement of Net Position .......................................................................................................... 3
Statement of Changes in Net Position ....................................................................................... 5
Notes to Financial Statements .............................................................................................. 7-11
Other Reports
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
and on Compliance and Other Matters ..................................................................................... 13-14
Thi
s page intentionally left blank.
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers, Tribal Liaison 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool,
an external investment pool of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2021,
and the related notes to the financial statements, as listed in the table of contents.
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial
statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control
relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s
judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial
statements, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor
considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the
financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
entity’s internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes
evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool as of June 30, 2021, and
the changes in financial position thereof for the year then ended in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the Oregon Intermediate Term
Pool and do not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the Oregon State
Treasury or the State of Oregon as of June 30, 2021, or the changes in their financial position
for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated
September 24, 2021,on our consideration of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over
financial reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is
solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over financial reporting and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of
the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting or on compliance.  That
report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing
Standards in considering the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting
and compliance.
State of Oregon
September 24, 2021
Stat
e of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2021
(Dollars in Thousands)
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents 2,359$
Investments 296,122
Due from Broker on Sale 11,965
Accrued Interest Receivable 1,522
Total Assets 311,968
Liabilities:
Payable for Investments Purchased 10,682
Total Liabilities 10,682
Net Position:
Held in Trust for Participants 301,286
Total Net Position 301,286$
The ac
companying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
This
page intentionally left blank
State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Changes in Net Position
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
(Dollars in Thousands)
Additions
Investment Earnings:
Interest, Dividends and Other 5,993$
Net
Decrease in Fair Value of Investments (814)
Securities Lending Income 8
Total Investment Earnings 5,187
Less Investment Costs:
Investment Activity Costs (Note 4) 139
Securities Lending Costs 2
Net Investment Earnings 5,046
Participant Account Transactions:
Participants' Contributions 158,000
Participants' Withdrawals (870)
Net Increase as a Result of Participant Transactions 157,130
Change in Net Position Held in Trust for Participants 162,176
Net Position - Beginning 139,110
Net Position - Ending 301,286$
The ac
companying notes are an integral part of the financial statements
This
page intentionally left blank
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(1) Sum
mary of Significant Accounting Policies
Reporting Entity   The Oregon Intermediate Term Pool (“ Pool”) is an intermediate term fixed income
investment vehicle.  Several state agencies and one  non-agency entity participate in the Pool, thus it is an
external investment pool as defined in Statement No. 31 of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board,
Accounting and Financial Reporting for Certain Investments and for External Investment Pools.
The Pool is not registered with the U.S. S ecurities and Exchange Commission as an investment company.
The State’s investment policies are governed by Oregon Revised Statutes and the Oregon Investment Council
(Council).  The State Treasurer is the investment officer for the Council and is responsible for all funds
entrusted to the Oregon State Treasury (OST).  These funds must be invested, and the investments managed,
as a prudent investor would, exercising reasonable care, skill and caution.  Investments in the Pool are further
governed by guidelines approved by the Council, establishing diversification percentages and specifying the
types and maturities of investments.  The Pool  guidelines permit securities lending transactions as well as
investments in repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.  Pool guidelines are discussed in greater detail
in the Investments section of Note 2.
The Pool is authorized under ORS 293.861 and ORS 293.863.  Standards for investment of the pool may be
found in ORS 293.701  to 293.857.  Pursuant to ORS 293.863 (5), state agencies have the opportunity to
participate in this investment pool subject to application requiring evidence of statutory authority to invest in
the Pool and subsequent approval by the OST.  The portion of the Pool belonging to external participants is
reported in an investment trust fund in the State’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
Basis of Accounting   These statements are prepared using the economic resources measurement focus and
the accrual basis of accounting.  Trade date accounting is observed, which means that purchases and sales of
securities are recorded on the day the trade takes place with a corresponding payable to or receivable from
the broker.  Changes in the fair value of investments are recognized daily .  The fair value of investments is
determined daily and is equal to market price.
Cash and Cash Equivalents   Investments with original maturities of three months or less are considered
cash equivalents and are reported at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.  Cash Equivalents also
include any cash held with the custodian, and amounts invested in  the Oregon Short  Term Fund (OSTF),
which is an external investment pool open to state agencies and local governments that acts as a demand
deposit account.
Investments   Investments with remaining maturities of  less than ninety days are carried at amortized cost,
provided that the fair value of these instruments is not significantly affected by the impairment of the credit
standing of the issuer or by other factors.  Amortized cost approximates fair value.  Investments with longer
maturities are carried at fair value.
Part
icipants’ equity; distributions of interest    The value of each participant’s investment is determined on
a proportional basis to the net market value of the entire portfolio.   Shares of the Pool represent a divisible
interest in the net value of underlying investments, accrued income and expenses. Interest income and capital
gains are not distributed to participants but are reflected in the underlying net position.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(2) Inves
tments
Investments   On June 30, 2021, the Pool reported investments of $298.5 million of which $2.4 million is
classified as Cash and Cash Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position.  The Pool’s guidelines establish
the Pool’s permitted investments and parameters for managing the various types of risk associated with these
investments (see the current portfolio guidelines a t (https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/invested-for-
oregon/pages/oregon-intermediate-term-investments.aspx#OITP.) T he diff erent risks will be discussed
below.
Schedule of Inv estment Characteristics
(Dollars in T housands)
Investment T ype Par Value
Reported
Amount
Weighted
Average Coupon
Weighted Av erage
M odified Duration
Cash and Cash Equivalents (1)  $            2,359  $           2,359 0.60 0.60
Asset-Backed Securities 70,981             71,130 1.70 1.42
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 12,739             13, 257 3.09 2.42
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 200 206  2.17 2.73
U.S Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities 16,600             17, 376 3.47 7.19
U. S.  Agen cy  St r ip s            130,976             10,565 0.60 3.09
Corporate Debt            125,838           131,247 3.52 4.41
U.S. Treasury Debt 52,293             52,341 1.02 5.52
To t a l 411,986$        298,481$       2.50 3.89
(1) Cash and Cash Equivalents include $2,359 invested in the OS TF.
A. Inter
est rate and Credit risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment.
OST Investment staff manages this risk by limiting the duration of investments held by the Pool.  The portfolio
guidelines require that the portfolio’s modified duration, a measure of interest rate risk, shall not exceed three
years. The weighted average duration for the Pool at June 30, 2021 was 3.89 years.  The maximum maturity
for any single investment should not be greater th an 10.25 years from settlement date, with exceptions for
asset-backed securities,  mortgage-backed securities,  and commercial mortgage-backed securities. These
securities use weighted average life (WAL) as a proxy for maturity and are limited to a WAL of five years,
or less, at the time of purchase.
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligation.  The
Pool’s guidelines require that all investments meet  minimum ratings requirements at the time of purchase.
Minimum required ratings are subject to investment type as dictated by the Pool’s guidelines.
Corporate notes and municipal debt must be rated investment grade or higher at time of purchase.  Foreign
government securities are required to have a minimum credit rating of AA- or Aa3 by at least two Nationally
Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSROs) .  Structured securities such as asset -backed and
mortgage-backed securities must be rated AAA at the time of purchase.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
Securit
ies downgraded below investment grade can be retained at the Senior Investment Officer’s discretion.
Rating groups are determined using the lowest actual rating from an NRSRO and are shown below:
C
ustodial credit risk for investments is the risk that, in the event of the failure of the counterparty to a
transaction, the pool will not be able to recover the value of an investment or collateral securities in the
possession of an outside party.  The Pool’s guidelines provide that investments are delivered to and held by
a third-party custodian, which holds the Pool’s securities in the S tate of Oregon’s name.  All trades where
applicable are executed by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securities are deposited in an eligible
financial institution prior to the release of funds.
C. Conce
ntration of credit risk
Concentration of credit risk is the risk of loss attributed to the magnitude of a fund’s investment in a single
issuer.  The Pool guidelines provide that the maximum that may be invested in any one issuer, as a percentage
of the Pool’s total investments is five percent, excluding the OSTF, U.S. Treasuries or U.S. Federal Agencies
or instrumentalities.  The Pool may invest up to 100 percent in those securities.   On June 30, 2021, the Pool
did not hold investments with any one issuer that exceeded these limi ts.  The schedule below lists issuers
where holdings are greater than 5 percent at the parent level.
Issuer Name Reported Amount Percent of Holding
U.S Treasury  $ 52,421 17. 6%
Schedule of Parent Leve Issuers - Holdings Greater Than Five Percent
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type
Weighted
Av erage
Modi fi ed
Duration
Reported
Amount AAA AA A BBB BB Not Rated
Asset-Backed Securities 1.42 71,130$       42,890$     7,019$    15,855$     5,366$         - $      - $
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 2.42 13,257         11,765       -  746 746              -         -
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (1) 2.73 206              -             -           -  -               -  206
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (1) 7.19 17,376         -             -           -  1,817           -  15,559
U.S. Agency Strips (1) 3.09 10,565         188            -           -              -               -         10,377
Corporate Debt 4.41 131,247       -             -           3,255         127,126       866       -
U.S. Treasury Debt 5.52 52,341         52,341       -          -              -               -         -
Ex ternal Investm ent Pool (2) 0.60 2,359           -             -           -              -               -  2,359
Total 298,481$   107,184$ 7,019$   19,856$   135,055$   866$    28,501 $
(1)U.S. federal debt carries an implicit guarantee of the U.S . Government.  For credit quality rules, federal debt is considered to be highest quality, except when rated
differently.
(2) The OSTF is not rated by the credit ratings agencies.  The composite credit quality rating of the OS TF's holdings was  AA at June 30, 2021.
B. Custodial credit risk
Interest Rate Risk and Credit Risk
(Dollars in Thousands)
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
D. For
eign currency risk
The Pool guidelines prohibit investments that are not  U.S. dollar-denominated; therefore, the Pool is not
exposed to this risk.
(3) Securi
ties Lending
The OST has authorized its custodian to act as its agent in the lending of the Pool ’s securities pursuant to a
form of loan agreement, in accordance with Pool  investment policies.  There have been no significant
violations of the provisions of the securities lending agreement.   The State’s securities lending agent lent
short-term and fixed income securities and received as collateral U.S. dollar -denominated cash.  Borrowers
were required to deliver cash collateral for each loan equal to not less than 102  percent of the market value
of the loaned security.  The State has the ability to impose restrictions during the year on the amount of the
loans that the securities lending agent made on its behalf, but did not impose any such limits during the year
ended June 30, 20 21.  The State is fully indemnified by its securities lending agent against losses due to
borrower default.  There were no losses during the year from the failure of borrow ers to return loaned
securities.
The Pool’s lending agent uses a fund to reinvest cash collateral received on behalf of the OITP and other
Oregon state agencies managed by the OST, exclusive of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund.
There were no securities on loan at June 30, 2021.
The State and borrowers maintained the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand.  As
a consequence, the maturities of investments made with cash collateral generally do not match the maturities
of the securities loans.  As of June 30, 2021, the State had no credit risk exposure to borrowers  related to
securities on loan.
(4) Man
agement Fees
In ac
cordance with ORS 293.718, the OST may deduct monthly 0.435 basis points of the most recent market
value of assets under management for administration and portfolio management.  For the year ended June 30,
2021 the OST charged the Pool a monthly rate of 0. 435 basis points based on assets under management in
the Pool.  Fees are deducted from investment income before distributions to participants.  Fees and other
expenses charged to the Pool totaled $139 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2021.
(5) Fai
r Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.   Observable inputs are developed
based on market data obtained from sources indepen dent of the reporting entity.  Unobservable inputs are
developed based on the best information available about the assumptions market participants would use in
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
pri
cing the asset.  The classification of securities within the fair value hierarchy is based up on the activity
level in the market for the security type and the inputs used to determine their fair value, as follows:
• Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
• Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or
similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model -derived valuations in which all
significant inputs are observable.
• Level 3 – Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are unobservable.
Lev el 1 Lev el 2 Lev el 3 Total
Investm ents:
Asset-Backed Securities -$  71,130$             -$  71,130$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -  13,257 -  13,257
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -  206 -  206
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities -  17,376 -  17,376
U.S. Agency Strips -  10,565 -  10,565
Corporate Debt -  131,247 -  131,247
U.S. Treasury Debt -  52,341 -  52,341
Total -$  296,122$         -$  296,122$
Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value as of June 30, 2021
Fair Value Measurements
(Dollars in Thousands)
The P
ool’s investments, other than those with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days, are valued
using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent pricing vendors.  The third-party vendors use
a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate relevant observable market data to arrive
at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace would pay for a security under current market conditions.
Investments with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days are carried at amortized cost, which
approximates fair value.  All of the Pool’s investments at June 30, 2021 are considered level 2.
OTHER REPORTS
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers, Tribal Liaison 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and
on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed In Accordance with Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States
of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of
the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, an external investment pool of the State of Oregon, as of
and for the year ended June 30, 2021, and the related notes to the financial statements, which
collectively comprise the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool’s basic financial statements, and have
issued our report thereon dated September 24, 2021.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Oregon
State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool
(internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial statements, but not
for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s
internal control over the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool. Accordingly, we do not express an
opinion on the effectiveness of Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over the Oregon
Intermediate Term Pool.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to
prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable
possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be
prevented or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or
a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness,
yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first
paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control
that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.  Given these limitations, during
our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material
weaknesses.  However, material weaknesses may exist that have not been identified.
Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool’s
financial statements are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance
with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance
with which could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements. However,
providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit,
and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.  The results of our tests disclosed no
instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under
Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of
the entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit
performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s
internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other
purpose.
State of Oregon
September 24, 2021