S
tate of Oregon
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT
INTERMEDIATE FUND
A
n Investment Pool of the State of Oregon
F
inancial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
This page intentionally left blank
ORE
GON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................... 1-2
Financial Statements:
Statement of Net Position .......................................................................................................... 3
Statement of Changes in Net Position ....................................................................................... 5
Notes to Financial Statements .............................................................................................. 7-11
Other Reports
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
and on Compliance and Other Matters .....................................................................................13-14
T
his page intentionally left blank.
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Local Government
Intermediate Fund, an external investment pool of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year
ended June 30, 2021, and the related notes to the financial statements, as listed in the table of
contents.
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial
statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control
relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s
judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial
statements, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor
considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the
financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
entity’s internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes
evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
presentation of the financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund as of June
30, 2021, and the changes in financial position thereof for the year then ended in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the Oregon Local Government
Intermediate Fund and do not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the
Oregon State Treasury or the State of Oregon as of June 30, 2021, or the changes in their
financial position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this
matter.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated
August 30, 2021,on our consideration of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over
financial reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is
solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over financial reporting and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of
the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting or on compliance.  That
report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing
Standards in considering the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting
and compliance.
State of Oregon
August 30, 2021
S
tate of Oregon
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2021
(
Dollars in Thousands)
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents 21,063$
Investments 225,666
Receivable from Broker on Sale of Securities 2,805
Accrued Interest Receivable 897
Security Lending Collateral (Note 3) 21,103
Total Assets 271,534
Liabilities:
Accrued Expenses 71
Payable for Investments Purchased 1,019
Obligations Under Security Lending (Note 3) 21,103
Total Liabilities 22,193
Net Position:
Held in Trust for Participants 249,341
Total Net Position 249,341$
T
he accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
T
his page intentionally left blank
State of Oregon
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Statement of Changes in Net Position
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
(D
ollars in Thousands)
T
he accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements
Addi ti ons
Investment Earnings:
Net decrease in fair value of investments (6,766)$
Interest, dividends, and other 7,946
Security lending incom e 87
Total Investment Earnings 1,267
L ess I nv estm ent Costs
Investm ent activity costs (Note 4) 312
Security lending costs 27
Net Investment Earnings 928
Participant Account Transactions
Participants' Contributions 500
Participants' Withdrawals (1,048)
Net Decrease as a Result of Participant Transactions (548)
Change in Net Position Held in Trust for Participants 380
Net Position - Beginning 248,961
Net Position - Ending 249,341$
T
his page intentionally left blank
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Reporting Entity The Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund (“Fund”) is an intermediate term fixed
i
ncome investment vehicle.  The Oregon Short Term Fund and several local governments participate in this
program, thus it is an external investment pool as defined in Statement No. 31 of the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board, Accounting and Financial Reporting for Certain Investments and for External
Investment Pools.
T
he Fund is not registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment company.
The State’s investment policies are governed by Oregon Revised Statutes and the Oregon Investment Council
(Council).  The State Treasurer is the investment officer for the Council and is responsible for all funds
entrusted to the Oregon State Treasury (OST).  These funds must be invested, and the investments managed,
as a prudent investor would, exercising reasonable care, skill and caution.  Investments in the Fund are furthe
r
g
overned by guidelines approved by the Council, establishing diversification percentages and specifying the
types and maturities of investments.  The Fund guidelines permit securities lending transactions as well a s
i
nvestments in repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.  Fund guidelines are discussed in greater detail
in the Investments section of Note 2.
T
he Fund is authorized under ORS 294.  Standards for investment of the Fund may be found in ORS 293.701
to 293.857.  Pursuant to OR S 294, local governments  meeting requirements established by OST have the
opportunity to participate in this investment fund subject to application and subsequent approval by the OST.
T
he portion of the Fund belonging to external participants is reported in an investment trust fund in the State’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
Basis of Accounting   These statements are prepared using the economic resources measurement focus and
the accrual basis of accounting.  Trade date accounting is observed, which means that purchases and sales of
securities are recorded on the day the trade takes place with a corresponding payable to or receivable from
the broker.  Changes in the fair value of investments are recognized daily .  The fair value of investments is
determined daily and is equal to market price.
Cash and Cash Equivalents   Investments with original maturities of three months or less are considered
cash equivalents and are reported at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.  Cash Equivalents also
i
nclude any cash held with the custodian.
Investments   Investments with remaining maturities of less than  ninety days are carried at amortized cost,
provided that the fair value of these instruments is not significantly affected by the impairment of the credit
standing of the issuer or by other factors.  Amortized cost approximates fair value.  Investments with longer
maturities are carried at fair value.
P
articipants’ equity; distributions of interest   The value of each participant’s investment is determined on a
proportional basis to the net market value of the entire portfolio.   Shares of the Fund represent a divisible
interest in the net value of underlying investments, accrued income and expenses. Interest income and capital
gains are not distributed to participants but are reflected in the underlying net position.
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(2) In
vestments
Investments   On June 30, 2021, the Fund reported investments of $247 million, of which $21 million is
classified as Cash and Cash Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position.  The Fund’s guidelines establish
the Fund’s permitted investments and parameters for managing the various types of risk associated with these
investments (see the current portfolio guidelines a t https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/invested-for-
oregon/pages/oregon-intermediate-term-investments.aspx.)  The different risks will be discussed below.
A. Int
erest rate and Credit risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment.
The risk is managed by limiting the duration of investments held by the Fund.  The portfolio guidelines require
that the portfolio maintain a weighted average duration, a measure of interest rate risk, of +/- 20% (percent)
relative to the duration of the Barclays Capital 1-5 Year Government/Credit Index (Benchmark). The duration
for the Fund and the Benchmark at June 30, 2021 was 2.88 years and 2.79 years, respectively.  The maximum
maturity for any single investment should not be greater than 10.25 years from settlement date, with
exceptions for asset -backed securities,  mortgage-backed securities,  and commercial mortgage -backed
securities. These securities use weighted average life (WAL) as a proxy for maturity and are limited to a WAL
of five years, or less, at the time of purchase.
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligation.  The
Fund’s guidelines require that all investments meet  minimum ratings requirements at the time of purchase.
Minimum required ratings are subject to investment type as dictated by the Fund’s guidelines.
Corporate notes and municipal debt must be rated investment grade or higher at time of purchase.  Foreign
government securities are required to have a minimum credit rating from S&P of AA-, Moody’s of Aa3, or
Fitch of AA-.  Structured securities such as asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities must be rated AAA
at the time of purchase.
Schedule of Inv estment Characteristics
(Dollars in Thousands)
Inv
estment Type Par Value
Reported
Amo
unt
Weighted Av erage
Coupon
Weighted Av erage
Modified Duration
Cash and Cash Equivalents 21,063$                21, 063$                0.13 0.01
Asset-Backed Securities 3,209 3,170 0.57 0.92
Federal Agency Debt 680 670 0.38 2.96
Federal Agency Mortgages 1,409 1,473 2.51 4.63
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 3,755 3,866 3.43 1.07
Municipal Debt 398 400 1 .32 0.08
Corporate Debt 109,188                113 ,369                2.64 2.77
U.S. Treasury 103,070                102,718                0.69 3.71
Total 242,772$            246,729$            1.59 2.88
Reported Amount is a combination of amortized cost and fair value.  See Note 1.
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
F
und guidelines allow securities downgraded below investment grade to be retained at the di scretion of the
external manager.  At no time should the weighted, average credit quality of the Fund be more than one rating
category below that of the Benchmark.  At June 30, 2021 the weighted average credit quality of both the Fund
and of the Benchmark was AA.   Rating groups, determined using the lowest actual rating from S&P  or
Moody’s, are shown below:
B. C
ustodial credit risk
Custodial credit risk for investments is the risk that, in the event of the failure of the counterparty to a
transaction, the fund will not be able to recover the value of an investment or collateral securities in the
possession of an outside party.  The Fund’s investments are delivered to and held by a third-party custodian,
which holds the Fund’s securities in the State of Oregon’s name.  All trades where applicable are executed
by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securities are deposited in an eligible financial institution prior
to the release of funds.
C. C
oncentration of credit risk
C
oncentration of credit risk is the risk of loss attributed to the magnitude of a fund’s investment in a single
issuer.  The Fund guidelines provide that the maximum that may be invested in any one issuer, as a percentage
of the Fund ’s total investments is three percent, excluding U .S. Treasuries or U .S. Federal Agencies or
instrumentalities.  The Fund may invest up to 100 percent in those securities.   On June 30, 2021, the Fund
did not hold investments with any one issuer that exceeded these limits.
D. F
oreign currency risk
T
he Fund guidelines prohibit investments that are not  U.S. dollar-denominated; therefore, the Fund is not
exposed to this risk.
Interest Rate Risk and Credit Risk
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type
Weighted
Av erage
Modi fi ed
Duration
Reported
Amount AAA AA A BBB BB Not Rated
Short Term  Investm ent Fund (1) 21,063$          -$              -$  - $  - $  - $  21,063$
Asset-Backed Securities 0.92 3,170              2,212             958 -  -               -  -
Federal Agency Debt 2.96 670 -  670 -  -               -  -
Federal Agency Mortgages 4.63 1,473              -  - -  -               -  1,473
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 1.07 3,866              3,866             -              -             -               -              -
Municipal Debt 0.08 400 400                -              -             -               -              -
Corporate Debt 2.77 113,369          2,750             4,586          45,098      55,275        5,234         426
U.S. Treasury 3.71 102,718          102,718         -              -             -               -              -
Total 246,729$      111,946$    6,214$       45,098 $  55,275$    5,234$      22,962 $
(1) The Short Term Investment Fund (STIF) is not rated by the credit ratings agencies.  The average credit quality of the STIF holdings was A1P1 and the weighted
average maturity of the S TIF w as 48 days at June 30, 2021.
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(3) S
ecurities Lending
The OST has authorized its custodian to act as its agent in the lending of the Fund ’s securities pursuant to a
form of loan agreement, in accordance with Fund  investment policies.  There have been no significant
violations of the provisi ons of the securities lending agreement.   The State’s securities lending agent lent
short-term and fixed income securities and received as collateral U.S. dollar -denominated cash.  Borrowers
were required to deliver cash collateral for each loan equal to n ot less than 102 percent of the market value
of the loaned security.  The State has the ability to impose restrictions during the year on the amount of the
loans that the securities lending agent made on its behalf, but did not impose any such limits during the year
ended June 30, 20 21.  The State is fully indemnified by its securities lending agent against losses due to
borrower default.  There were no losses during the year from the failure of borrowers to return loaned
securities.
The Fund’s lending agent uses a fund to reinvest cash collateral received on behalf of the OLGIF and other
Oregon state agencies managed by the OST, exclusive of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund .
T
he balances of securities on loan , cash collateral received and invested collateral at market value ar e
p
resented in the schedule below.
T
he State and borrowers maintained the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand.  As
a consequence, the maturities of investments made with cash collateral generally do not match the maturities
of the securities loans.  As of June 30, 2021, the State had no credit risk exposure to borrowers  related to
securities on loan.
(
4)
Management and Administrative Fees
I
n accordance with ORS 293.718, the OST may deduct monthly 0.435 basis points of the most recent market
value of assets under management for administration.  For the year ended June 30, 2021 the OST charged the
Fund a monthly rate of 0. 435 basis points  based on asset s under management in the Fund. Portfolio
management was ad ministered by a third -party asset manager dur ing the year ended June 30, 20 21 and
m
anagement fees are deducted from investment income before distributions to participants.  Fees and other
expenses charged to the Fund totaled $312 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Schedule of Securities Lending Balances
Securities on
Loan at Fair
Value
Collateral
Receiv ed
Inv ested
Cash
Collateral at
Fair Value
U.S. Treasuries 1,308$           1,334$          1  0$
U.S. Agency Securities 19,265           19,649          2   19,649
Corporate Debt 1,426             1,454            3   1,454
Total 21,999$         22,437$        21,103$
1.  U.S. Treasuries $1,334
2. Cash Collateral $19,649
3. Cash Collateral $1,454
(Dollars in Thousands)
OREGON LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2021
(5)
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.   Observable inputs are developed
based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity.  Unobservable inputs are
developed based on the best information available about the assumptions market participants would use in
pricing the asset.  The classification of securities within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the activity
level in the market for the security type and the inputs used to determine their fair value, as follows:
• Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
• Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or
similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model -derived valuations in which all
significant inputs are observable.
• Level 3 – Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are unobservable.
Lev el 1 Lev el 2 Lev el 3 Total
Investm ents by type:
Short Term  Investm ent Fund -$  21,063$             -$  21,063$
Asset-Backed Securities -  3,170 -  3,170
Federal Agency Debt -  670 -  670
Federal Agency Mortgages 1,473 1,473
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -  3,866 -  3,866
Municipal Debt -  400 -  400
Corporate Debt -  113,369 -  113,369
U.S. Treasury -  102,718 -  102,718
Total -$  246,729$         -$  246,729$
Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value as of June 30, 2021
T
he Fund’s investments, other than those with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days, are valued
using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent pricing vendors.  The third-party vendors use
a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate relevant observable market data to arrive
at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace woul d pay for a security under current market conditions.
Investments with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days are carried at amortized cost, which
approximates fair value.  All of the Fund’s investments at June 30, 2021 are considered level 2.
O
THER REPORTS
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
Independent Auditor's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and
on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed In Accordance with Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States
of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of
the Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund, an external investment pool of the State of
Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2021, and the related notes to the financial
statements, which collectively comprise the Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund’s
basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated August 30, 2021.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Oregon
State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting of the Oregon Local Government
Intermediate Fund (internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial
statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon
State Treasury’s internal control related to the Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund.
Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of Oregon State Treasury’s
internal control related to the Oregon Local Government Intermediate Fund.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to
prevent, or detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable
possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be
prevented or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or
a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness,
yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first
paragraph of this section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control
that might be material weaknesses or significant deficiencies.  Given these limitations, during
our audit we did not identify any deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material
weaknesses.  However, material weaknesses may exist that have not been identified.
Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Oregon Local Government
Intermediate Fund’s financial statements are free from material misstatement, we performed
tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant
agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the financial
statements. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an
objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.  The results of our
tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported
under Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of
the entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit
performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s
internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other
purpose.
State of Oregon
August 30, 2021