Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Oregon Must Improve
Community College
Performance, Student
Support, and
Sustainability Amid
Persistent Enrollment
Declines
December 2022
Report 2022-35
Correction 12/20/22: In the original report, Figure 6 on
page 15 included an incorrect number for Umpqua
Community College’s 2020-21 retention rate. Figure 6 has
been revised to include the correct number from HECC’s
updated Snapshot Report on the college.
Why this audit is important
• Oregon’s 17 community colleges
enrich their communities, help
meet state education and
workforce goals, and help
students who may not be able to
afford college without them.
• The colleges enroll many
students historically underserved
by the education system:
students identifying as
Black/African American,
Hispanic/Latino, American
Indian/Alaska Native, Native
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, low-
income, older, and rural.
• More than half of Oregon’s
community college students
report food insecurity, housing
insecurity, or homelessness.
• The colleges and the state have
focused primarily on access, but
are adding a sharper focus on
student success and equity gaps.
Our findings indicate this shift
remains a work in process.
What we found
1. Since HECC began overseeing the community college system in
2015, HECC and the colleges have focused more on equity and
effective data use, students are earning certificates and associate
degrees at higher rates, and equity gaps have narrowed. (pg. 14)
2. As in our last community college audit, also in 2015, student
performance still lags versus other states, the system continues
to lack transparency and accountability, and strategic investment
remains limited. (pg. 13)
3. State and colleges continue to lack sufficient student and program
data to guide strategic improvements. (pg.18)
4. Crucial student support services continue to be inadequately
monitored and supported, limiting opportunities for students with
the most need. (pg. 25)
5. State financial aid to students is relatively strong in national
comparisons but has significant gaps in students served. (pg. 31)
6. Despite increased state funding, Oregon’s colleges face substantial
threats to sustainability, including enrollment declines that
outpace other states, with little strategic guidance or state
oversight. (pg. 34)
7. To ensure system accountability and drive timely improvements,
state leaders must give HECC the necessary staff and a clear
mandate to monitor the colleges, publicly report on improvements
needed, and help advance improvement efforts. (pg. 12)
What we recommend
We made five recommendations to HECC and one recommendation to the Governor’s Office and Legislature. HECC
partially agreed with all of our recommendations. The agency’s response can be found at the end of the report.
Audit Highlights
Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Oregon Must Improve Community College Performance, Student
Support, and Sustainability Amid Persistent Enrollment Declines
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 3
Introduction
Community colleges serve a diverse set of students and are particularly important for historically
underserved students. Community colleges are also critical to equitably improving workforce and
education opportunities across the state and meeting workforce needs.
The Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC) has statewide authority for community
colleges, public universities, and private colleges. This audit focuses on HECC’s role with Oregon’s
community colleges.
HECC coordinates multiple areas of higher education, including
community colleges
Oregon’s Legislature established HECC in 2011 to be the statewide authority for higher education. The
agency includes eight offices with 180 employees (161 Full-Time Equivalent, or FTE, positions),
overseen by a 15-member volunteer commission appointed by the Governor. Commission members
include one member from each congressional district, four members of the general public, and six
members representing students, faculty, and staff at public universities and community colleges.
Statutes authorize HECC to:
• Develop goals across the postsecondary education system;
• Prepare strategic plans and statewide budget requests;
• Encourage and facilitate cost-sharing opportunities;
• Distribute public funding to colleges and state financial aid to Oregon students;
• Evaluate and report the success of higher education efforts; and
• Collaborate with partners to improve access to higher education for diverse and
underserved populations.
HECC works with stakeholders to submit higher education budget requests to the Governor. In the
2021-23 biennium, HECC’s budget for its own operating expenditures totaled $70.7 million.
The Legislature approved $700 million for 2021-23 to support community college operations. State
appropriations for individual colleges are allocated through the Community College Support Fund.
Allocations are based largely on enrollment and adjusted for property tax receipts to ensure total
public resources per student are relatively equal across the state. In the colleges’ budgets for the 2022-
23 fiscal year, projected state appropriations for operations ranged from about $3 million at the state’s
smallest colleges to more than $100 million at Portland Community College, the largest.
HECC’s Mission
• Dramatically and equitably improve postsecondary attainment levels.
• Improve Oregon’s economic competitiveness and quality of life.
• Ensure that Oregon students have affordable access to colleges and universities.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 4
The Office of Community Colleges and Workforce Development (CCWD) provides direct support to
all 17 community colleges and their roughly 178,000 credit and non-credit students.1 Prior to HECC’s
creation, CCWD was an independent agency. In 2015, CCWD became an office within HECC. The office
has 20 positions (18 FTE). It works with the colleges and workforce programs to support student
learning. CCWD staff collaborate on statewide educational efforts such as: Adult Basic Skills, Career and
Technical Education, equity and student success initiatives, and transfers to universities. CCWD has
one dedicated research analyst, who focuses primarily on federal grants for Career and Technical
Education and Adult Basic Education.
HECC’s 16 key performance measures include four that pertain to community colleges. Those measures
focus on four-year completion and transfer rates and on wages five years after students complete
college, including results by student race and ethnicity.
Local boards and other parties have substantial roles in the community college system
Oregon’s community colleges are governed by independent and locally elected boards. The boards
appoint college presidents, set college policy, approve budgets, and guide the colleges in accomplishing
their mission and meeting strategic goals.
The Oregon Community College Association represents colleges and board members. The association
is separate from HECC, but plays a significant role in HECC and legislative decisions on budget, policy,
and college funding allocations. The Oregon Student Success Center, under OCCA, leads important
college improvement initiatives.
The Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities is the federally authorized accreditation
body for Oregon and other Northwest states. Colleges must be accredited for their students to receive
federal financial aid. The commission monitors and evaluates individual college operations and issues
periodic independent evaluations to the colleges. If deficits are identified, colleges must address them
during their seven-year accreditation cycle.
Local Workforce Investment Boards, supported by HECC’s Office of Workforce Investments, play a
major role in convening regional industry sector partnerships. The boards work alongside community
colleges to develop and maintain regional workforce related initiatives.
Community colleges offer transfer and career-oriented education
programs in communities throughout Oregon
The colleges offer technical training degrees and certificates connected to jobs as well as college-level
courses and associate degrees that can count toward two full years of a bachelor’s degree. Some
certificates can be obtained in a year or less, allowing for faster skill-building geared toward specific
jobs. Colleges also offer non-credit courses for professional and personal development, and as of 2019
can offer applied bachelor’s degrees in specific topics.
1 Students at community colleges can take courses for college credit and can apply for applicable federal and state financial a id.
Colleges receive state reimbursement for all eligible for-credit courses and for some non-credit courses, such as Adult Basic
Education and English language courses.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 5
Offerings vary by college, but generally include apprenticeship programs, dual-credit programs for high
school students, and four types of courses:
• Lower Division Collegiate: Courses and
associate degrees provide transferable, college-
level credits in liberal arts or specific fields such
as business, English, education, and biology.
• Career and Technical Education: Courses,
certificates, and associate degrees focus on
professional and applied or hands-on subjects,
such as nursing and welding. CTE courses and
career pathways can lead directly to jobs and
may also apply toward a bachelor’s degree. These courses comprise 16% of community
college course offerings statewide.
• Adult Basic Skills and Developmental Education: Courses offer instruction in English as a
second language, writing and math fundamentals, high school diploma and General
Equivalency Degree (GED) preparation, and workplace skills such as critical thinking and
digital literacy. Courses may be for credit or not for credit.
• Adult Continuing Education and Personal Enrichment: Community-based, non-credit
courses provide work or hobby skills, such as professional training, commercial truck driver
licensing, foreign languages, watercolor painting, and gardening.
Figure 1: Oregon has 17 community colleges, supported by property taxes from specific zones
2020-21 For-Credit
Headcount Enrollment
Oregon Coast
Tillamook Bay
Columbia Gorge
Clatsop
Southwestern
Blue Mountain
Klamath
Treasure Valley
Umpqua
Rogue
Central Oregon
Linn Benton
Clackamas
Lane
Mt Hood
Chemeketa
Portland
State
1,527
1,675
2,310
2,367
2,551
2,683
3,356
5,786
6,536
8,380
11,080
11,817
12,263
13,112
39,133
125,972
Source: HECC
2020-2021 offerings by type:
51% Lower Division Coursework
16% Career Technical Education
2% For-Credit Developmental Education
31% Non-Credit Education
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 6
Community colleges provide opportunities to students who might not otherwise be able
to attend higher education
Due to their relatively low tuition, open admission, and dispersed locations, community colleges offer
critical higher education opportunities for Oregonians — particularly for those who identify as a
member of an historically underserved or excluded population, such as:
• Students from low-income families;
• Rural residents;
• Older students returning to education;
• First-generation students, those who are among the first in their family to attend higher
education; and
• Students identifying as Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian/Alaska
Native, or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander.
Community colleges in Oregon and across the country follow an open-enrollment model; anyone can
enroll to take college courses and work toward an associate degree, many of which allow students to
transfer directly into any Oregon public university.2 This is a common path for Oregon students to take;
in 2019-2020, one third of students who earned a bachelor’s degree transferred from an Oregon
community college.
Oregon Community College Students
Students of color: 28%
Older than 25: 50%
Eligible for Pell Grants: 62%
Cannot meet college expenses: 30%
Part-time: 54%
Average tuition for 2022-23
Public Universities: $9,838
Community Colleges: $4,128
Starting wages for 2021 Oregon job vacancies
High School Diploma: $17.17
Postsecondary or Other Certification: $26.22
Other Advanced Degree: $33.36
Median salary 5 years after graduation
All certificates: $40,593
Associate degree: $43,183
Bachelor’s degree: $51,186
While some students come straight from high school, half are older than 25. These older students may
take courses to further their education, establish a career, develop an existing one, or work toward
changing careers. Their community college involvement can range from taking a single high-impact
course to obtaining a certificate or degree. More than half of community college students attend part-
time, often working and raising families while pursuing their educational goals. Nearly two-thirds are
eligible for federal Pell Grants, need-based financial aid that covers some college costs for low-income
students.3
Students may choose community colleges due to their relatively low tuition costs, to stay in their own
community, to pursue a particular technical path, to prepare for college-level courses, or some
2 Open-enrollment exceptions include programs such as first responders, nursing, dental hygienists, and medical technology,
which require applications and often prerequisite courses. Apprenticeship programs, which can be offered through community
colleges and may or may not be associated with degree programs, can also have admissions requirements.
3 Roughly a third of all students in higher education receive Pell Grants. The maximum annual award in 2022-23 was just under
$7,000.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 7
combination of these. Community colleges also serve students who leave high school unprepared for
college math and writing, offering academic support that fits their needs. Our audits in K-12 education
have highlighted deficits in graduation rates, math and English performance, and equity gaps in these
areas, which creates challenges for students beginning their postsecondary education.4 The pandemic
deepened K-12 challenges.
Community colleges are an important part of advancing students’ earnings prospects. Historically,
students who have higher education degrees earn higher wages, on average, than those who do not.
The state’s 40-40-20 goal envisions 40% of Oregon’s young adult population with university degrees,
40% with community college completion, and 20% with high school degrees by 2025. Oregon reviewed
this goal in 2018 and projected the addition of 120,000 additional jobs requiring postsecondary training
or education by 2030. To meet this need, 300,000 additional adult Oregonians would need to earn a
new degree, certificate, or credential valued in the workforce.
As part of 40-40-20 efforts, the state committed to closing educational attainment gaps among
historically underserved populations, which contribute to inequitable wages.
Figure 2: Significant wage gaps exist for underserved race or ethnicities, as shown in wages for full-time,
year-round workers from 2016 to 2020
Source: Oregon Employment Department 2022 Wage Report
Community colleges provide students with academic and personal support to increase
student success
To better address student needs and increase student success, community colleges provide a series of
student supports — a key topic covered in this audit. The state provides support directly through
student financial aid, which increases access and affordability. Colleges provide academic and personal
support to help students identify academic goals, choose the right courses, and connect to the college.
These services can be general, applying to all students, or more intensive and tailored to specific
groups of students based on need.
4 K-12 audits have included audits on high school graduation rates, results for at-risk students in alternative and online education,
barriers at struggling, high-poverty schools, and additional support needed for students experiencing disabilities.
$0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
$40,000
$50,000
$60,000
$70,000
$80,000
$90,000
Asian White Two or More
Races
Black / African
American
Native
Hawaiian/
Pacific Islander
Hispanic/Latino Some Other
Race
American
Indian/ Alaska
Native
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 8
At their best, student support services are holistic and proactive, giving students the academic,
personal, and financial services they need, when they need them. Many successful student service
programs help students build connections with advisors, career coaches, mentors, and faculty. These
students are more likely to complete courses and graduate — and to do so more quickly. Support
services include:
Basic support services:
• Academic advising
• Financial aid advising
• Tutoring
• Career counseling
Targeted support services:
• Identify students in need of assistance
• Support specific student groups, including underserved students
• May combine advising, counseling, tutoring, coaching, and mentoring
• May include scholarships or other incentives to participate
“Wrap-around” support services:
• Childcare
• Mental health counseling
• Transportation vouchers
• Food and clothing pantries
• Technology lending programs, including computers
Several statewide initiatives focus on increasing student success and emphasize the importance of
strong student support. Two major initiatives, Guided Pathways and Strong Start Oregon, are run by
the Oregon Student Success Center, which is operated under the Oregon Community College
Association and is independent of HECC. The other, Career Pathways, receives funding from the state.
Guided Pathways focuses on getting students into college, creating relevant academic pathways, and
providing the support necessary to help them earn a postsecondary credential. Recommended
supports include enhanced career advising for entering students, quickly connecting students with
faculty, and embedding specialized advisors in broad fields or “meta-majors” to help students stay on
track. Strong Start Oregon targets student success and equity by moving students quickly through
Guided Pathways
•Coordinator: Oregon
Student Success Center
•Colleges implement
comprehensive, student-
focused redesign to
streamline college offerings
and increase student
success.
•State funded? No
Strong Start Oregon
•Coordinator: Oregon
Student Success Center
•Students with remedial math
needs take college-level
math courses with
appropriate supports,
reducing time to complete a
credential.
•State funded? No
Career Pathways
•Coordinator: HECC
•Extra help for students to
complete accelerated career
and technical programs and
quickly land jobs. Students
may be unemployed or
career changers.
•State funded? Partial
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 9
college-level math. Students who traditionally would have been placed in one or a series of remedial
math courses are instead placed directly in college-level math courses with a concurrent course that
provides background knowledge, reviews course material, and previews upcoming topics. Career
Pathways received nearly $15 million in state funds to spend in 2022 as part of “Future Ready Oregon”
legislation, which provided $200 million for workforce development. Colleges offer a variety of career
and technical-focused credentials known as “Career Pathways,” which are accompanied by student
supports such as wrap-around services, academic support, and job search assistance.
Student supports can help address the many obstacles students face to completing college, including
difficulties meeting basic needs. The 2019 nationwide Real College Survey reported combined student
responses on basic needs from 14 of Oregon’s colleges. All told:
• 41% of students reported food insecurity
• 52% reported housing insecurity
• 20% reported experiencing homelessness
• 60% reported food insecurity, housing insecurity, or homelessness
Historically underserved students by race and ethnicity and Indigenous students reported higher rates
of basic needs insecurity.
Figure 3: Rates of food insecurity, housing insecurity, and homelessness differ among student groups
Source: The Hope Center for College, Community, and Justice, 2019 Real College Survey
Effective supports can be critical for historically underserved and first-time students, who often face
greater barriers to success. For example, an unguided student without personal or family experience in
higher education may arrive at community college behind in math and English. They may default to a
general degree instead of attempting a specialized one, missing out on a streamlined path to a job,
further education, or potentially significant earnings differences.5 They may not be aware of school
resources for academic tutoring or food and transportation stipends, or of crucial financial aid
5 Community colleges offer programs designed to improve students’ economic outcomes. Economic outcomes vary by academic
degree or certificate. For example, census data indicates that five years after graduation, the median earnings of Chemeketa
Community College students who complete a general education associate degree is $36,527, compared to $68,666 for students
who complete a health-related associate degree.
Food Insecurity (%) Housing Insecurity (%) Homelessness (%)
White Hispanic/Latino Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
Black/African American American Indian/Alaska Native Indigenous
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 10
opportunities, and are likely to have fewer in-home resources to help, putting them at greater risk for
low academic success.
During the pandemic, student mental health needs increased, Oregon college administrators said, along
with needs for housing, transportation, and childcare. Research published in 2021 found more than half
of community college students nationwide had symptoms of one or more mental health conditions.
Other national research found moderate to substantial increased rates of academic distress, social
anxiety, family distress, and eating concerns in Fall 2021 compared to pre-pandemic fall terms among
students seeking services in college counseling centers.
Student outcomes, and the narrowing of educational and workforce equity gaps, are dependent on
schools providing both effective education programs and strong student guidance and support.
Student Lisa Ozuna on the importance of community college
When she returned to college in 2020, Lisa Ozuna had just filed
for divorce, received an eviction notice for herself and her
youngest daughter, and was battling anxiety and depression.
Ozuna had been a stay-at-home mom for years. She had no work
experience and no high school degree.
Ozuna enrolled in Umpqua Community College’s GED program at
age 35, joining the ranks of students older than 25 who make up
half the enrollment at Oregon’s community colleges. She had
attended Umpqua before, after she became pregnant at age 18 and dropped out of Roseburg High
School. Back then she had been inspired by Adult Basic Education instructor Andre Jacob, who was still
there, almost 20 years later. Returning “was intimidating for sure,” Ozuna said, but she had her 12-year-
old daughter at home. “I thought, now is the time to show her Mom can do this.”
Under Jacob’s instruction, Ozuna obtained a GED in six weeks. Her best friend, Alison, provided shelter
and an internet connection. Her two daughters and her sister encouraged her. Before she moved into a
two-year program, she learned about time-management and self-awareness in UCC’s Take Flight
program. She also connected with her counselor, Christina Wooten, who helped her build a schedule
that would work for her and her daughter. She received financial aid, and state caseworkers helped
with assistance for needy families, food stamps, and housing. “I had a lot of support from UCC, from
family, from everybody,” Ozuna said. “Everybody was willing to guide me.”
Ozuna is a full-time student now, nearing completion of her associate degree, and targeting a
bachelor’s degree in business management. She wants to attend the University of Oregon, then build
an arts and crafts business that draws on her artistic and business skills. In January 2022, she and her
daughter moved into their own apartment. “It was the smoothest term I’ve ever had,” Ozuna said. “It’s
very nice to be self-sufficient and on my own.”
“I had a lot of support from (the college), from family, from everybody. Everybody was willing
to guide me.”
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 11
Audit Results
Since our last community college audit in 2015 — the year HECC began overseeing the community
college system — HECC and colleges have focused primarily on access, but are adding a sharper focus
on student success and equity gaps. HECC has improved its analysis of statewide student performance,
colleges are focusing more on equity and effective data use, and students are completing certificates
and associate degrees at higher rates. 6
Despite these encouraging improvements, more work is needed. We found deficits in three primary risk
areas: student success, student support, and college sustainability. Student success still lags versus
other states. The system continues to lack transparency and accountability. Use of student and
program data for improvement, in many cases, remains at the early stages. Crucial student support
services continue to be inadequately monitored and supported, though evidence for their importance
has increased.
Since 2015, threats to the sustainability of Oregon’s community colleges have also increased. Despite
relatively high per-student funding and increased state funding, Oregon’s colleges face significant
threats to the sustainability of their current operations, including rising costs for colleges as well as
students, and enrollment declines that outpace other states.
Our audit results indicate HECC struggles to address the major risks confronting community colleges, in
part because of its limited statutory role and in part because of limited staff capacity in key areas. As a
coordinating agency, HECC must work with the entirety of Oregon’s community college governance
system — college and state leaders, legislators, accreditors, workforce boards, and college boards — to
build consensus and help drive system improvements. The rapid improvements students need require
these groups to collaborate and agree on effective steps to boost student success, equity, and college
sustainability, a challenging task.
To help address this challenge and increase accountability for state funds, state leaders must better
position HECC to help drive improvements in the community college system. The agency needs
sufficient staff and authority to monitor how the colleges are doing, publicly report on improvements
needed, and help advance improvement efforts. Continuing to rely largely on individual institutional
efforts and accreditor review to drive change risks delaying improvements that would benefit students
and the state economy.
In this report, we often compare practices in Oregon to those in Washington State. Washington has a
less decentralized system and a better-staffed state agency than Oregon. Its state board, dedicated
solely to community colleges, is charged with “general supervision and control” of the system, for
example, and the governor appoints trustees of individual colleges; in Oregon, they are elected by local
voters. However, Oregon does not have to make wholesale changes to HECC’s authority and staffing to
emulate many of the key steps Washington has taken. Improved staffing and clear legislative mandates
in key risk areas would benefit Oregon colleges and their students.
6 Our last community college audit was issued in May 2015: Report 2015-14, Community and College Workforce Development:
Targeted Investments Could Improve Student Completion Rates
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 12
The next biennium is critical, a time to recover from pandemic setbacks, strive for increased efficiency,
and assess the sustainability of the system going forward. For a more evidence-based and equitable
system to emerge, Oregon state and college leaders, working together, will need to focus much more
intently on addressing student success, student support, and college sustainability.
HECC needs support from Oregon leaders to increase student and
college success and better ensure accountability for state funds
Throughout this audit, we consistently encountered questions about HECC’s ability to effectively
address systemic barriers to student and college success, either because of a lack of explicit statutory
authority or legislative support, inadequate staff at HECC and the colleges, or both.
HECC, a relatively new agency, was formed partly because universities wanted more local control and
less state oversight of their operations. Community colleges, supported in part by local property taxes,
have long emphasized local control, and HECC’s statutes governing community colleges contain a
proviso that all powers not specified in statute reside with the college boards.
Given its limited statutory authority, HECC cannot force colleges to make operational changes; college
boards are responsible for college operations. Instead, HECC is responsible for monitoring the system’s
performance, reporting quality information on how the system is doing, and working with state leaders
and stakeholders to address problems that arise — all pillars of effective internal control, a process for
ensuring an organization’s objectives are met. HECC’s authority also includes proposing a higher
education budget and setting the formula for distributing state funds to colleges, both potential tools
for addressing problems.
HECC’s ability to monitor, report, and collaborate to drive change requires commitment from colleges,
agency staff, and the commission. It also requires state leaders to explicitly prioritize accountability and
improvement in the community college system. HECC may not be able to gain sufficient college
cooperation without support from the Governor and Legislature, provided through state budgets,
statutory changes, budget notes, and clear communication of priorities.
In some areas, HECC can begin to make improvements relatively quickly, including enhancing
transparency, using data more effectively at HECC and colleges, and using public reporting to help drive
decision-making. However, deeper improvements in these areas require more HECC staff devoted to
community college support and improved staffing at the colleges. In other areas, including monitoring
and improving student support and college sustainability, state leaders need to provide clear support
to increase HECC’s role and help the agency be more effective.
Student Success
Using data to drive improvement: HECC’s responsibility to provide analysis and data-driven
recommendations is relatively clear. Statutes charge HECC with advising the colleges, Legislature, and
Governor on policies to encourage student success and completion. The agency’s own strategic
From an internal control standpoint, monitoring means consistently reviewing how effectively a system or
program is working and addressing problems that arise.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 13
roadmap emphasizes “reporting to steer progress” as key to its work. Yet limited HECC and college
staff devoted to data analysis limits efforts in this area.
Transparency and accountability: HECC’s authority is also clear in this area. The founding principles in
the legislation that established HECC includes using metrics to foster accountability. HECC has
increased state reporting of community college performance data since its inception in 2015. Yet its
reports are not easy to analyze. They also do not include comparisons to the performance of other
states and colleges that would help identify Oregon’s strengths and weaknesses. HECC needs clear
direction from state leaders to publicly report student success benchmarks that inform the colleges,
the public, and policy makers.
Performance-based funding: HECC is pursuing funding based in part on student performance for the
second time, an effort that could help focus the system on student success and equity goals. It has
clear authority to do so since it controls distribution of state funds. However, if HECC does choose this
path, it will need support and oversight from the Governor’s Office and key legislators to maximize
system benefits and minimize unintended negative consequences.
Student Support
HECC’s statutory role includes increasing educational attainment, reducing barriers to on-time
completion, and expanding successful student programs — all areas where effective student support
programs are crucial. Holistic student support is also essential to meet equity goals. However, HECC
leaders said specific legislative authority and more staff are needed for the agency to effectively
monitor student services and work with colleges in this area.
College Sustainability
In key areas, including monitoring financial condition and spending, HECC has less statutory authority
to monitor sustainability for community colleges than it does for universities. In other areas, such as
shared services, HECC has statutory authority to encourage and facilitate change, but has had limited
success driving improvements. Oregon leaders need to help HECC address these critical voids.
Increased focus on accountability and effective data use would
improve lagging student success at Oregon’s community colleges
Despite improvements in completion and transfer rates, Oregon continues to rank low among states in
student completion rates and transfers to universities. Similarly, equity gaps in outcomes for
historically underserved students persist despite narrowing over time.
The results demonstrate the need to further accelerate efforts to improve student success. Dramatic
differences between colleges on student outcomes underscore the need for public reporting that
identifies colleges needing support and highlights effective practices.
Students who do not pass a class, or who intend to graduate but do not, have lost time and money and
may leave with significant debt but no degree — a blow to their chances of improved economic
mobility. System shortfalls also threaten Oregon’s ability to meet its 40-40-20 goal; currently, the
biggest gap is at the community college level, with 18% of young adults holding an associate degree or
career certificate as of 2017, well under the 40% goal.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 14
HECC’s key roles include enhancing effective data use,
providing more transparency, and increasing system
accountability, giving HECC opportunities to help drive
further improvement.
Student results have improved at Oregon’s
community colleges, but are still low nationally
Key outcomes for community college students include
completion — how many students obtain associate degrees
or certificates — and how many successfully transfer to
universities. Since our last community college audit in 2015,
student completion and transfer rates to universities have
improved, and some equity gaps have narrowed.
One of HECC’s key performance measures for community
colleges is the percentage of new, “credential-seeking”
students who complete or transfer within four years.7 This
metric increased from 45.8% in 2017 to 51% in 2021, just
short of HECC’s statewide goal. Students’ median annual
wages five years after they complete a certificate or degree,
another key performance measure for HECC, also increased
from about $35,000 to $40,000 from 2017 to 2021.
Despite this encouraging progress, Oregon still ranks low in
national comparisons of some key student success
outcomes, according to data from three primary national
datasets that track community college performance. The
datasets cover limited numbers of students, with two
focusing solely on first-time college students, for example.
However, our analysis showed concerning results across all
three datasets.8
The National Student Clearinghouse Research Center’s
data shows Oregon ranked on average 39th among states in
six-year completion rates from 2016 to 2021, and 40th in 2021
rates. The center focuses on first-time students, both full-
time and part-time. Its completion rates include degrees or
certificates earned at community colleges, as well as
completions after students transfer to a four-year university.
As shown in Figure 5, Oregon has remained below the
national average in this metric for the last eight years.
7 Among other criteria, HECC defines a credential-seeking student as a student new to the institution who takes a certain number
of credits over time. HECC aligns its definition of credential-seeking student with the Volunteer Framework of Accountability
(2021 KPM report).
8 For details on our data analysis methodology, see Appendix A.
Figure 4: Oregon ranked 40th in 2021 completions
Source: The National Student Clearinghouse
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 15
Figure 5: Oregon consistently lags in completion rates over time
Source: National Student Clearinghouse Research Center 2021 completion report
Similarly, Oregon’s student outcomes from the federal Integrated Postsecondary Data System, which
focuses on first-time, full-time students, also ranked low among states. From 2016 to 2019, Oregon
ranked 35th on average in three-year completion and transfer rates. Oregon’s results fell below the
national average for all student demographic groups. Individual results for Oregon community colleges
showed substantial differences, ranging from 59% for the highest-performing college to 27% for the
lowest. As illustrated in Figure 6, this variation extends to more recent data tracked by HECC.
Figure 6: Student completion and student retention varied widely across colleges in 2020-21
Completion and Transfer
Rate 4-Year Cohort
Student Retention Year
1 to Year 2
Average years to complete
associate degree
State Average 51% 75% 3.3
College:
Blue Mountain 55% 72% 2.7
Central Oregon 55% 70% 3.3
Chemeketa 48% 77% 3
Clackamas 48% 78% 3
Clatsop 53% 56% 3
Columbia Gorge 56% 72% 3.7
Klamath 60% 72% 3
Lane 50% 73% 3.7
Linn Benton 59% 72% 3.3
Mt. Hood 41% 74% 3.3
Oregon Coast 35% 72% 3
Portland 52% 74% 3.7
Rogue 48% 71% 3.7
Southwestern 65% 67% 2.3
Tillamook Bay 49% 82% 3
Treasure Valley 52% 72% 3
Umpqua 62% 77% 3
Source: HECC Statewide Higher Education Snapshots
Finally, the Voluntary Framework for Accountability offers completion and transfer data as well as
early indicators of student success. The organization analyzes outcomes across broader student
cohorts than the other datasets. Early indicators such as early credit accumulation are useful, as
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
2008-14 2009-15 2010-16 2011-17 2012-18 2013-19 2014-20 2015-21
National Washington Oregon
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 16
college research shows hitting early milestones is important to long-term student success. However,
the ability to benchmark is limited, with only a quarter of the nation’s roughly 1,000 community
colleges participating.
Our review of Voluntary Framework data showed mixed results. Oregon’s combined completion and
transfer rates were lower than the average of participating colleges for two of the three 2013 student
cohorts tracked. For early indicators, average results for students beginning college in three separate
years — 2013, 2017, and 2018 — showed Oregon exceeding overall results for all participating colleges
in three areas: passing college-level English, student retention after fall term, and course passing rates.
However, Oregon fell below the average for all three measures of first-year credit accumulation and for
students passing college-level math.
Separately, a confidential analysis of early success indicators in Oregon, completed by a consultant for
the Oregon Student Success Center, found gains in most areas from 2010 to 2020, but student success
at low levels in key areas. For example, the average rate of first-time college students who completed
college-level math doubled over the decade, but to only 20%.9 Similarly, early credits earned all
increased, but only a third of students completed nine credits in their first term in 2020.10
The analysis also reported substantial differences between colleges, with concerning low rates at some
schools. The rate of completion of nine credits in the first term ranged from a low of 18% to a high of
67%, for example, and students completing college-level math ranged from a low of 3% to a high of
44%. The confidential analysis did not identify colleges by name.
College-level math is not required for some relatively high-paying associate degrees, including nursing
and fire science. However, it is required for Oregon’s transfer-focused associate degrees and shorter
transfer course “modules,” which are offered statewide and are meant for students planning to attend
an Oregon university.11 College-level math is generally required for Bachelor of Science degrees. Some
universities also require it for Bachelor of Arts degrees.
Outcomes have also improved for historically underserved students, yet significant
equity gaps remain
As with all students, combined completion and transfer rates for historically underserved groups by
race and ethnicity improved from 2017 to 2022. HECC data also indicates median wages five years after
community college completion have increased for all the groups, narrowing wage gaps. Yet differences
in outcomes between these groups and white students continue, raising equity concerns for
underserved students who disproportionately rely on community colleges.
9 The consultants calculated average college results, with results for every college weighted the same regardless of enrollment.
10 Students must earn 15 credits per term to obtain an associate degree in two years.
11 Oregon’s transfer degrees satisfy the lower division general education requirements at baccalaureate degrees at the public
universities in Oregon. A student who transfers to a university with this degree will have completed at least 90 transferable
credits and hold junior status for registration purposes. The Oregon Transfer Module is a 45-credit subset of transferable college
courses.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 17
Figure 7: Four-year completion and transfer rates for Oregon credential-seeking students improved from
2017 to 2022, but equity gaps remain
Source: HECC data
These “disaggregated” results should be viewed with caution, particularly for underserved students
other than Hispanic/Latino students, Numbers for other underserved groups are low in Oregon and
outcomes can vary substantially with small changes. Community colleges also have significant numbers
of students who do not report their race or ethnicity, reducing the reliability of the numbers.
National Student Clearinghouse Research Center data showed Oregon ranked 39th for average six-
year completion rates for first-time white students from 2019 to 2021. (The center reported three
years of results by race and ethnicity, not the six years reported for overall totals.)
Average rates for Black/African American and Hispanic/Latino students ranked higher in comparison to
other states, in the mid-20s, but remained below rates for white students. White students averaged a
40% completion rate, while Hispanic/Latino students averaged 37% and Black/African American
students averaged 28%, for an equity gap of 12 percentage points.
Similarly, the Integrated Postsecondary Data System showed Oregon ranked 40th for average three-
year completion and transfer rates for first-time, full-time white students, with an average 41% rate
from 2016 to 2019. The data also showed higher average rankings for historically underserved races
and ethnicities, but deficits relative to white students.
The Voluntary Framework data also identified concerning equity gaps in early indicators of student
success. Black/African American and American Indian/Alaska Native students were behind the
outcomes for white students in all 10 early indicators reported for the main cohort that started in 2017.
Hispanic/Latino and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander students were behind in eight of 10, including all
the measures of early credit attainment and passing college-level math.
This data also identified significant disparities by race and ethnicity in math readiness upon arrival at
college, with more than half of Hispanic/Latino students and Black/African American students arriving
with a developmental math need.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
American Indian/Alaska Native
Asian American
Black/African American
Hispanic/Latino
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
White
20222017
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 18
This gap is a particular concern given the low postsecondary completion rates for students who start in
“developmental” or below-college math. According to a 2020 HECC analysis, only 23% of students who
begin in developmental math courses earn a postsecondary degree or other credential within six years.
This statistic does not include career-technical programs, which may not require college-level math.
Oregon must focus more urgently on using data and strategic analysis to drive
improvement
Data use and analysis at HECC and community colleges has also improved since our 2015 audit. Yet
problems identified in that audit persist, reducing the system’s ability to use strategic analysis and
reporting to drive faster improvement.
HECC’s statutory role enables the agency to use data analysis to increase student success, student
equity, and college efficiency. HECC’s major responsibilities, listed in its strategic plan, include
evaluating the success of higher education efforts through data analysis, research, and reporting.
HECC’s strategic roadmap includes “reporting to steer progress” among four primary avenues through
which HECC conducts its work.
Since 2015, HECC has produced in-depth reports that illustrate its capability to provide meaningful and
targeted information. Examples include reporting outcomes on students who transfer from community
college to a university, students receiving state financial aid grants, and postsecondary outcomes for
students who have recently graduated from high school. These reports are typically required by the
Legislature and are reported at a state level, without identifying performance for individual colleges. In
the financial aid area in particular, HECC’s analysis has helped drive system improvements.
Individual colleges are focusing more on using data to increase student results. This is due in part to
new accreditation requirements that require colleges to use student achievement data to drive
improvement. Colleges are increasingly using student data to improve academic programs, identify
students who need extra support, and tailor initiatives to improve low student outcomes.
Some colleges, including Linn-Benton, are further ahead than others, but colleges and the state are
generally at the early stages of using data to drive improvement. Oregon colleges and the state need
improvement in five critical data areas:
• Developing data systems and analysis tools to identify and address student needs.
• Setting and using meaningful metrics to inform decision-making and budgets.
• Identifying problems and investing strategically to address them.
• Effectively evaluating departments, academic programs, and support programs.
• Using disaggregated data to address equity gaps.
Data Use at Linn-Benton Community College
Linn-Benton Community College provides a public dashboard for several key college performance measures,
disaggregated by categories such as race and ethnicity, and displayed using Tableau for real-time analysis.
The college has contracted with four other colleges to provide data for them, allowing colleges to not only
identify their own performance outcomes, but to benchmark against participating colleges.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 19
Similar to our 2015 audit, college researchers expressed frustration at spending their time on extensive
state-level reporting requirements, rather than on analysis to improve student success. To support
colleges, HECC can:
Prioritize and define core student success metrics: HECC and community colleges do not have an
agreed-upon definition of student success and core metrics to measure it. The agency’s key
performance measures do not tie to data the colleges can use for national benchmarking and do not
include early indicators of student success, a focus of key state initiatives and national best practices.
HECC can work with community colleges to identify and define shared metrics to measure student
success, such as completion, retention, and early momentum metrics. This process should align with
college accreditation requirements.
Streamline data collection: College researchers told us they are flooded with data and data reporting
requirements from national and state reporting systems, with more time-consuming reporting systems
on the way. HECC can work with colleges and the Oregon Student Success Center to streamline
duplicative requests, reduce requests for data that is no longer used, identify which data reporting
systems are most useful statewide, clarify data definitions and reporting schedules, and use the
established state reporting database to assist colleges in national and state reporting.
Provide more meaningful analysis of existing data: HECC receives voluminous student-level data
from the colleges and national student surveys. However, it synthesizes little of it in ways that are
meaningful to college improvement and accreditation efforts and publishes only limited analysis on its
website. The lack of meaningful analysis slows movement to address student success. For example:
• HECC issues several periodic reports that provide useful, in-depth analysis of topics that
address equity and student success, but does so primarily when legislatively mandated.
These reports typically do not provide college-level data. They do not help the colleges
benchmark their own progress against other schools or identify shortfalls to address.
• HECC submits all the colleges’ student-level data to the Voluntary Framework of
Accountability initiative, which returns analysis to HECC that provides detailed student
success results for the state and each college. HECC has not publicly shared those results
or established state goals for early student success indicators.
• HECC supported the effort to pass 2022 legislation that designated $10 million biennially to
community colleges for Career Pathways programs. However, available analysis of Career
Pathways at the state level is limited. The state does not maintain a central database, and
definitions of program performance are not standardized statewide. Under the new
legislation, HECC plans to more effectively track initiative results.
Increase guidance on data use: Colleges report using a variety of software they have upgraded at
considerable expense to address college data needs. Yet the data literacy levels of staff and faculty to
use this data often remain low. Colleges must improve data literacy to collect and use data
meaningfully. Given new data-focused accreditation requirements, HECC can work with accreditors to
provide more data-focused training to colleges, administrators, faculty, and staff.
Provide longitudinal data: A common college need is access to longitudinal data that shows where
students stand prior to college, and how students who complete specific college programs do at
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 20
universities and in the job market. HECC inherited the Oregon Longitudinal Collaborative and the
associated legislative mandate to provide longitudinal data in 2019.12 Overall, Oregon’s reporting and
progress on longitudinal data has been slow. For the 2021-23 biennium, the Governor and Legislature
cut six FTE staff from the effort, citing pandemic-era hiring freezes. However, a recent draft report
from the collaborative, focused on addressing Oregon’s nursing shortage, demonstrates its potential to
identify important problems and potential solutions. The analysis found Oregon lags the nation in
healthcare graduates. It also included a survey of community college healthcare programs to identify
issues, such as difficulty finding faculty, and provided recommendations to address the problem
HECC and college officials cite limited analytical staff as a key reason for these deficits. HECC has a
research and policy director who works on all higher education issues and two research analysts solely
dedicated to college data collection, basic reporting, and analysis related to federal grants. The Oregon
Student Success Center is a one-person shop.
By contrast, Washington has made a substantial investment in improving data analysis and reporting,
including higher staffing in research and analysis, data services, and student success. Its State Board of
Technical and Community Colleges — a 239-employee agency and board devoted solely to community
colleges — has five policy research analysts devoted to community colleges instead of two at HECC. It
also has a six-member Student Success Center instead of a staff of one, and a 13-member data
services team to maintain central data and help colleges with reporting and training. The board’s
Information Technology Division provides colleges with centralized services for resource planning and
manages enterprise IT contracting. In Oregon, colleges do this work individually.
Washington produces multiple online dashboards, publicly accessible, that provide college-level data on
student outcomes and early indicators, broken down by specific student groups. The state has clearly
defined student success metrics and has a statewide data dictionary for accurate reporting. Its data
governance committee meets monthly to determine data definitions, policies, and quality control, and a
separate body works with the board to continuously improve data quality.
HECC needs to further improve the transparency of community college performance
and accountability for state funding
Our audit identified two key systemic shortfalls contributing to lagging student success: limited
transparency and limited accountability in the community college system.
Transparency — publicly sharing where Oregon’s community colleges are performing well and where
they are not — can help drive improvement. It can help highlight both weaknesses to address and
effective practices to maintain or expand.
HECC’s founding legislation includes using metrics to foster accountability, and HECC has improved
transparency since community colleges came under the agency in 2015. It publishes annual “snapshots”
12 Senate Bill 909 (2011) established the directive to establish a statewide longitudinal education data system. The goal was to
provide policymakers and educators with a tool to direct funds and with methodologies to support continuous improvement.
Washington State, a relatively high performer on community college student outcomes, takes key data steps
Oregon does not, backed by a well-staffed agency devoted solely to community colleges.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 21
of selected college data on its website, maintains a publicly available database that includes student
enrollment and completion data by gender, age, race, and ethnicity, and has prepared a set of
statewide equity briefs that detail outcomes for students of color. Under the new accreditation
standards, colleges must post indicators of student success on their websites, broken down by
demographic categories.
These improvements required significant effort. However, HECC still does not provide a full picture of
community college student success to the public.
• It does not publicly benchmark Oregon’s student success outcomes against other states or
national results in its annual key performance measures or in reports to the Legislature.
• The limited college-level student success data publicly available on HECC’s website is
incomplete and difficult to analyze.
• It collects, but does not publicly release, information on early student progress indicators
by college.
• HECC has paid for interested community colleges to administer a national survey of
student engagement for over a decade. HECC has not publicly shared the results.
Outside HECC, the Oregon Student Success Center tracks early student progress indicators and long-
term outcomes as part of its Guided Pathways initiative. However, the center collects this crucial data
separately from HECC and distributes reports and results to the colleges only — even HECC does not
receive them. The lack of close collaboration between HECC and the Oregon Student Success Center is
in sharp contrast to Washington, which has a student success center housed in its state agency for
community colleges, and recently obtained additional funding for Guided Pathways.
In addition, the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, which accredits higher education
institutions in Oregon, does not release detailed accreditation reports, though some Oregon colleges
do post them on their websites.
The lack of transparency limits the ability of state leaders, policymakers, students, and stakeholders to
identify and address system challenges. It is also in sharp contrast to Oregon’s K-12 system and to the
detailed dashboards and college data made available in other states, such as Washington.
Accreditation reports from the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities provide important
accountability and can help drive improvements. However, the 7-year accreditation cycle can make for
slow change. Accreditors also do not consistently evaluate the capacity of colleges to conduct in-depth
data work. Outside of being notified of significant accreditor findings, HECC does not monitor strengths
and weaknesses identified in extensive accreditation reports, an independent source of information
that could deepen its discussions with colleges, the Governor, and the Legislature.
Oregon has taken some steps to add accountability requirements. For example, the Future Ready
Oregon legislation in 2022 required specific outcome reporting. It also added staff at HECC to
administer grants under the program and monitor grant performance, including three permanent
analysts and seven limited-term analysts. However, the bulk of state funding for community colleges
has few accountability requirements beyond required college reporting of results and finances.
Assessment of Oregon’s legislative initiatives, including Future Ready, is confined to separate legislative
reports. Washington, by contrast, uses publicly available online dashboards to report initiative results.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 22
Figure 8: Washington’s public dashboards provide easy access to detailed state and college results
Source: Washington State Board of Community and Technical Colleges
The state budget for community colleges includes a HECC strategic fund aimed at promoting student
success, a potentially more accountable segment of state funding. However, the fund has dropped to
0.75% of the Community College Support Fund, or $5.2 million for the 2021-23 biennium, contrary to
recommendations in our 2015 audit.
Basing community college funding partially on student success and equity has
substantial risks but could increase Oregon’s focus on equitable improvement
For the second time since 2015, HECC, working with a committee of stakeholders, is considering
“performance-based funding” for community colleges as part of a review of its formula for distributing
state funds to the colleges. Currently, the distribution of state funding is based primarily on enrollment.
Effectively implemented, performance-based funding could help Oregon reach consensus on
appropriate student success metrics, increase system focus on student success and equity, and boost
transparency over college performance – all important steps identified in this audit. HECC also has clear
authority over distributing state funds to colleges.
However, academic research indicates performance-based funding is associated with at best modest
gains in student retention and graduation. It also carries substantial risks of unintended consequences,
including incentivizing colleges to reduce recruitment of underserved students and college gaming of
the system. If HECC adopts performance funding for the colleges, it must develop a detailed, credible
plan to track the extent of systemic improvements and to minimize and monitor these risks.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 23
Among states, performance-funding metrics range from early student credit accumulation to final
outcomes such as transfer to a university, certificate and degree completion, job placement, and
graduate earnings. Washington and other states also focus on equity. They reward colleges that
improve outcomes for some combination of students from historically underserved races and
ethnicities, low-income students, adult students, and academically underprepared students. As of
2020, 30 states had performance-based funding for community colleges.
Figure 9: Thirty states had performance funding for community colleges in 2020, but most used it for less
than 20% of state funding
Source: Rosinger, Ortagus, Kelchen, Cassell & Brown (2022): New Evidence on the Evolution and Landscape
of Performance Funding for Higher Education, The Journal of Higher Education
Oregon has had performance-based funding for public universities, including an equity component,
since 2016. HECC analysts say results on Oregon university outcomes measured have generally
increased — as many have for Oregon’s community colleges — but it is too early to attribute university
gains to the new funding method. Previous efforts to implement performance-based funding have been
stalled in part by debates about how to define student success in the community college environment,
where students may seek important goals short of completion, such as obtaining a GED or learning a
new language or career skill.
Academic research indicates performance funding, while popular among states, is a “weak policy lever”
generally associated with null or modest gains in student retention and graduation. In part, that is
because most states are wary of basing large portions of funding on performance, fearing it will hurt
low-performing colleges. Research also indicates performance-based funding can have substantial
negative consequences. It can prompt colleges to emphasize short-term certificates with relatively low
value in the job market. It can hurt colleges without the resources to increase support for underserved
students or invest in new data systems to help boost performance. It can also lead colleges to focus
recruitment and support on students more likely to complete, reducing enrollment of the very students
state equity goals seek to support.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 24
Academic research and Washington’s experience indicates this approach can also help drive important
systemic improvements, including:
• Well-defined, consistent data on student outcomes critical to state goals, along with
agreed-upon measures of student success;
• Renewed state and college commitments to student success, including efforts to increase
student retention, increase data analytics, and improve tutoring, academic advising, and
student support services;
• Increased focus on struggling and disadvantaged students, labor market outcomes, and on
educational attainment in high-demand disciplines;
• Increased public transparency and accountability for the state and individual colleges; and
• More robust data for college benchmarking and other data-based student success efforts.
States can take steps to reduce the risk of negative consequences, academic research indicates,
including rewarding colleges that enroll or graduate underserved student groups. States can include
bonuses for equity progress in the funding system, reward student progress as well as final outcomes,
and reward associate degrees and long-term certificates more than short-term certificates.
Oregon could adjust the distribution formula to address key state goals, short of or in addition to
performance-based funding. Potential changes include adding funding to help colleges serve
underserved students, allocating extra money for higher cost CTE programs, and rewarding colleges
that adopt programs that move students into college-level math and English more quickly.
The state could also substantially increase strategic funding tied to well-defined and transparently
reported performance metrics, again with or without using performance metrics in the distribution
formula. This approach would likely need to cover a substantial portion of college funds to drive
substantial system improvement, and could be tied to funding increases. The 2019 Legislature’s
Student Success Act added $1 billion a year in new funding for K-12 and early education, tying the
funding increase to new accountability measures.
Either approach could help colleges identify and expand successful programs. Among other areas, that
improvement could benefit student support, the next risk area our audit addresses.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 25
Karen Muñoz and the power of holistic advising
“The real problem is when a student runs into problems, and they don’t have somebody
to back them up.”
Karen Muñoz has seen the importance of advising and student
support through two lenses — first as a student at Chemeketa
Community College and then, five years later, as an advisor
herself. Muñoz is one of four Success Navigators at Chemeketa,
helping launch new students in their first terms. These positions
were created as part of Chemeketa’s Hispanic Serving Institution
Grant. They help students register for classes, apply for financial
aid and scholarships, choose a focus of study, and connect to
other sources of support.
"Often, new students think I'll hand them a schedule,” Muñoz said. “Instead, we have to work together
to figure out what they need, what their goals are, what the best classes are, and what else they need
to succeed." The key could be a computer, food stamps, housing, childcare, or visiting the mental
health counselors on staff. "The real problem is when a student runs into problems, and they don't have
somebody to back them up."
Muñoz's approach draws on personal experience. Despite acceptances at four-year colleges, she chose
Chemeketa to start. "My parents were upset,” she said. “There's this stigma in the Latino community
that if you go to a community college, you'll drop out and won't succeed." But Muñoz knew what was
best for her: two years at community college, transfer, and go into medicine. Then came science
classes, and the realization that medicine wasn't for her. She was devastated.
"If it weren't for my advisor, I wouldn't have made it,” she said. “I had an advisor I met with every week
almost, who made sure I was doing everything right. That really got me through that first year, just
having someone who really guided me and understood me. It was like having a parent figure within
college.” When it came time to graduate from Chemeketa, she handed each member of her family a
degree, and told them, "There's still more to come."
Muñoz earned her bachelor’s degree and returned to work for Chemeketa. Now, she focuses on being
the kind of advisor who guided her, providing support to keep students coming back.
HECC, state leaders, and colleges must identify and expand
effective student supports to increase equity and student success
Research shows lower advisor caseloads and more holistic student support help drive student success
and can be especially critical to the success of vulnerable students. However, concerning support
service shortfalls remain in Oregon. HECC is not monitoring college student support. State funding for
support services is limited, and their vulnerability to budget cuts threatens ongoing efforts for student
retention and achievement.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 26
Improved student support helps drive student success, particularly for vulnerable
student populations
Research on the effectiveness of student support programs, particularly for vulnerable populations, is
clear: Students do better when provided with holistic, easily accessible financial, academic, and
personal support, and when they have the resources necessary to focus on their coursework. HECC’s
equity lens, its strategic roadmap, accreditation requirements, and national stakeholder groups
consistently emphasize the importance of student support services in student success.
Academic advising is a fundamental student support service, and research shows that low advisor
caseloads may help reduce equity gaps. A 2022 consultant study13 of student supports funded by the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation found average caseload size for advisors at community colleges that
closed graduation outcome gaps for Black/African American, Hispanic/Latino, and Indigenous students
in the last decade was far lower than at colleges that saw gaps widen. The study identified high
caseloads as the top barrier to improving advising from 2020 to 2022.
Building on basic advising, more intensive holistic support services help students get the timely
academic and personal support they need to succeed in college. These higher-intensity programs
include academic and career coaching, frequent advising, lower caseloads, and, in some cases,
scholarships. They also help students build relationships at the college, improving their connection and
engagement with school. The services are critical for first generation, low-income, and historically
underserved students, who may face more obstacles to success.
States and individual colleges around the country have seen results after strengthening advising and
more holistic support for students:
• New York’s ASAP program provides extensive student support for students seeking associate
degrees. It offers personalized advising, tutoring and career development services. It also
provides financial benefits such as tuition waivers, textbook assistance, and transit cards. The
program began in 2007, and ASAP students’ three-year completion rates increased to 52.4% —
almost double those of similar, non-ASAP students. New York has since expanded ASAP
student enrollment from 4,300 students in 2011, to 25,000 students in the 2018-19 year. These
results have been duplicated in Ohio community colleges as well.
• Ohio’s implementation of Guided Pathways, a program also being implemented in Oregon,
shows how even colleges with limited resources can make large-scale changes in student
support and success. Participating colleges combined resources and support programs and
showed improved student progression and completion. Research on Ohio’s work recommends
increasing personal supports to help meet the needs of underserved students.
13 Shaw, C., Bharadwaj, P., Smith S., Spence M., Nguyen A., Bryant, G. (2022, July 11) Driving Toward a Degree – 2022. Tyton
Partners.
“Significantly improving educational outcomes ... is likely to require major investments in targeted financial
relief and on-campus student supports that improve their likelihood of success and completion.”
HECC 2016-20 Strategic Plan
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 27
• San Antonio College creates a feeling of “family” with the expectation everyone on campus
from staff to faculty to leaders, is responsible for students’ well-being inside and outside of the
classroom. Four-fifths of students attend part time, but the college’s three-year graduation
rate is higher than the national average, with narrow equity gaps for students of color. Faculty,
staff, and leaders track data and use it to act. Students follow rigorous course guides and lose
at most one course when they transfer — less than a quarter of the national average.
• Broward College focused resources on student services, eliminating a small but costly
athletics program in the process and cutting other programs. The budget adjustments allowed
them to halve their student-to-advisor ratio from 700-1 to 350-1, embed tutors in hundreds of
classes with the highest failure rates, and establish food pantries. Faculty receiving equity-
focused training halved the outcomes gap between Black/African American and white students
in their courses and eliminated it for students from low-income backgrounds.
Intensive student support programs have been successful in Oregon colleges as well, though generally
limited in the students they serve:
• Portland Community College’s Future Connect program is modeled after New York’s ASAP
program. It provides full-time incoming students from traditionally underserved communities
with math, writing, coaching, and scholarships. Research found the program increased
participants’ retention and overall success versus similar students.
Students from Portland Community College’s Future Connect program
Future Connect provides intensive support and scholarships to help students through college, with
strong evidence of success.
Nonso Agum wants to start a business, travel, and be debt free. Future
Connect provides a reliable, quick contact for help and advice, he said
— and a sense of community from the start. “One of the reasons a lot
of people are not successful in college is there is no one there to help
you early on. It’s that shock value.”
Chelsea Monarch left an abusive situation and was recently homeless
for seven months. Monarch plans to be a licensed social worker, to
provide mentoring and therapy for houseless youth. “It was easy to
stop believing in myself. It’s why it’s so important to have support.”
Reynaldo Memije Cortez worked throughout high school. After
graduating, he wants to work as much as he can to help his family,
including his younger brother and sister. “This program helps connect
you to people who are struggling with the same things you’re struggling
with. It really helps a lot.”
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 28
• Chemeketa Community College improved and expanded their student support services
using federal funding from a Hispanic Serving Institution grant. The college redesigned its
website and on-campus student support spaces. It also added positions to provide
comprehensive academic and career support. The work allowed the college to expand its
grant-based programs to a wider student population.
• Southwestern Oregon Community College provides student supports to a significant
percentage of its student body. The high coverage comes partially because 30% to 40% of the
college’s students are athletes or in a culinary program, living on-campus. They attend school in
cohorts full-time, which strengthens engagement and student connections. Southwestern has
significantly outperformed state averages in early indicators of student success and in
completion and transfer rates.
• Ten community colleges run Student Support Services TRIO programs.14 These federal
programs support transfer-oriented students who are low-income and first-generation.
Competitive federal funds allow schools to provide intensive advising and other academic
support not otherwise offered. Continued funding partially depends on meeting or exceeding
established student success goals, as well as other evidence of providing quality services.
Despite progress, substantial shortfalls in critical support services remain
Recent Oregon legislation and pandemic-era grants have helped improve and expand student support.
In 2021, legislators created benefit navigator positions at each college to help students connect with
college, local, state, and federal resources. Legislators also established an underserved student
listening task force and expanded open-source textbook availability to help lower student costs.
The Legislature’s Future Ready workforce initiative in 2022 includes money for career-technical
programs that offer related student support. During the pandemic, many colleges acted quickly to use
millions in federal funds for financial aid, technology, housing, and other basic student needs.
Since 2015, HECC has awarded competitive, grant-based funds to colleges focused primarily on
increasing support services for underserved, low-income, and first-generation students.
However, as in our 2015 audit, we found large shortfalls in student support services across the state.
College support officials reported staffing and caseloads as their greatest challenges, along with
concerns about their ability to connect and intervene with students. Intensive support service
programs that build deeper connections with students are relatively small, with precarious funding and
limited reach despite significant need.
While underserved student populations are most at risk, limited support services affect student
success outcomes for the entire student body. In the national 2021 Community College Survey of
Student Engagement, 75% of Oregon community college students surveyed reported receiving the
support they need to succeed at the college. However, only 57% reported having more than one
meeting with academic advising and planning services, as compared to holistic models that recommend
14 The history of TRIO began with Upward Bound, which emerged out of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 in response to the
administration's War on Poverty. In 1965, Talent Search, the second outreach program, was created as part of the Higher
Education Act. In 1968, Student Support Services, which was originally known as Special Services for Disadvantaged Students,
was authorized by the Higher Education Amendments and became the third in a series of educational opportunity programs. By
the late 1960's, the term "TRIO" was coined to describe these federal programs.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 29
every student meets with an advisor regularly. Only 17% reported attending more than one career
counseling session; and 19% reported receiving no academic planning. Federal funding for student
service offerings during the pandemic ends for all colleges in 2023, leaving institutions without a clear
path forward in the face of ongoing enrollment declines and potential budget cuts.
Our survey of support service leaders, interviews, and data analysis identified three specific student
support challenges applicable to all students:
• Low levels of basic support at some colleges, with college officials reporting advisor
caseloads of up to 600 to 900 students per advisor, making it challenging to offer students
more than basic, drop-in advising
• High turnover in support services, with low salaries and burnout as factors.
• Wide variance in the role of faculty in advising, with five colleges in our survey of support
service leaders reporting they do not have formal faculty advising in place and two
reporting 100% faculty advising.
• A heavy college reliance on adjunct faculty, who have less time and responsibility for
student support and may not be paid for advising. As of 2019, about 80% of Oregon’s
instructional staff were not on a tenure track, higher than the 66% national average.
We also found gaps in the intensive programs that cover students with high levels of need. These
programs are small and typically more costly to operate. They often leave large unmet need even in the
targeted populations they serve, including first-generation college students, low-income students, and
historically underserved students.
For example, the ten Oregon community colleges that implemented TRIO Student Support Services in
the 2021-22 school year served 1,698 students total. For context, one of Oregon’s smallest colleges,
Southwestern, estimated the total students eligible for the program in 2018 at their college alone as
more than 1,000 students, two-thirds of the statewide total served three years later. At Portland
Community College, by far the largest of Oregon’s colleges with almost 40,000 for-credit students, the
successful Future Connect program generally serves 350-400 students annually.
High-intensity programs — critical for equity efforts — also face precarious funding. The programs are
typically supported by up to five-year grants. These temporary grants are costly to apply for and
administer, can be difficult to hire staff for, and are subject to cuts when grants run out. The programs
are less likely to be funded by college general funds, a more stable form of funding. Administrators
report they are at high risk amid budget cuts because it can be easier to cut student service
administration and staff than it is to cut faculty and course offerings to students.
Intensive student support also misses crucial categories of students. Many programs focus primarily on
traditional students, recently out of high school. They often miss non-traditional students, such as
older students, students working on GEDs, and adult learners returning to college, a significant
demographic at Oregon’s community colleges.
In 2021, Connecticut began consolidating its community college system to provide more comprehensive
student services, including cutting their academic advisors’ caseloads in half to reach a 1:300 advisor-to-
student ratio.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 30
Rural colleges face additional challenges. Among them: fewer community resources, struggles to pass
voter-approved bonds that improve facilities and services, and difficulty recruiting diverse staff and
faculty to run key programs.
The need for student support is also likely to increase. National research and Oregon’s 2021 test results
indicated drops in important student success measures in the K-12 system during the pandemic.
Students coming from high school are likely to need more supports upon entering community college,
increasing the burden on the colleges to provide tutors, coaches, developmental education, and other
academic supports.
Our student support findings align with the findings of the Legislature’s Joint Task Force on Student
Success for Underrepresented Students in Higher Education, which issued its initial reports in
November 2022 after talking with college and university students across the state. The taskforce
noted that underrepresented students often do not feel like they belong and recommended expanding
student support programs with positive outcomes, as well as expanding childcare in both community
colleges and universities. The taskforce also identified other equity issues. For example, many colleges
do not include permanent diversity, equity, and inclusion officer positions, the taskforce noted, and
instructors of color may disproportionately be low-paid adjunct faculty with high rates of turnover.
HECC’s budget request for the 2023-25 biennium includes $100 million to address taskforce
recommendations in both colleges and universities.
Student support services are not adequately monitored or supported
Despite their importance to improving equity and student success— goals stressed by HECC and
accreditors — monitoring, analysis, and targeted state funding of student support services at Oregon’s
colleges are minimal. Accreditor focus on student support is also limited, despite improved standards
aimed at increasing student support.
In a general sense, HECC’s statutes appear to support a HECC role in monitoring and promoting these
services. The statutes direct HECC to increase educational attainment and reduce barriers to on-time
completion, and student support services have shown great promise in doing so. HECC officials also
told us they recognize the importance of student support to the agency’s own student success and
equity goals. However, they said the agency needs more specific legislative authority and more staff
capacity to effectively monitor student services, request additional data from colleges, and work
collaboratively on improvements.
As in our 2015 audit, colleges struggle to analyze the results of student support programs, assess their
impact, and make improvements. Some colleges have recently acquired software that holds promise
for improved tracking, but overall challenges include tracking program costs, identifying staffing needs,
and analyzing program effectiveness in increasing student success and narrowing equity gaps.
This lack of monitoring of student support offerings has significant consequences. Effective monitoring
would include tracking the sufficiency and effectiveness of statewide initiatives, college-specific
student support programs, and academic advising — and reporting on their status. Potential metrics
Intensive support programs typically focus on traditional students recently out of high school, not adult
learners returning to college or students in developmental programs.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 31
include academic advisor caseloads, students served by programs, estimates of eligible students not
served, and individual program impacts on student success. Better tracking would help the state and
colleges analyze the impact of existing student services and identify the extent of shortfalls. It would
also help the state establish permanent, larger-scale funding for effective programs and establish
appropriate accountability measures for targeted funding.
College officials interviewed said the state does not provide sufficient data to assist their efforts,
despite heavy reporting requirements. In the absence of state assistance, college administrators report
a high need for data analytics and management software used to identify student needs and analyze
the impact of particular programs. This software is costly to purchase and implement, and colleges
must often do so individually, unlike in Washington, which maintains an enterprise resource
management system for all its colleges.
Accreditors have improved standards tied to the adequacy of student support services. Their reviews
could help identify student support successes and limitations. Yet, our review of recent accreditation
reports found accreditor scrutiny of student support coverage and effectiveness was minimal. Among
other shortfalls, the reports included limited evaluations of the sufficiency of supports for underserved
students, despite the accreditation standards’ strong focus on closing equity gaps.
In addition, unlike the public university funding formula, the community college funding formula does
not provide extra money for student groups likely to need more support services. The state also
provides little direct funding for support services.
One exception is Oregon’s First-Generation Underserved Students Success Grant Fund, established in
2015 through legislation that created two-year grants for support programs. Program results are
generally good, but student participation has been limited, ranging from 10 students at some schools to
350 to 400 students in Portland Community College’s Future Connect program. The dollar amount is
also relatively small, at less than $2 million a year.
The state has not analyzed the outcomes of the state-funded success grants. Schools report the grant
fund is useful, but the low funding and short-term focus is a deterrent to participating. Several colleges
chose not to reapply after the initial funding round.
Oregon’s financial aid to students has grown, but it does not fully
cover costs or fully target the students who need it most
HECC’s biggest effort to directly support students is distributing state financial aid. In recent years,
HECC has substantially increased financial aid to help boost student access to community colleges. For
its 2023-25 budget, the agency is proposing $780 million in additional state funding for student aid at
community colleges and universities to help increase access.
“Technolology can help triage and provides efficiency. It can help reach more students efficiently and provide
early warnings. But it’s not a replacement for human connection.”
– An Oregon community college dean of student services
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 32
State grants allow students to borrow less and can help increase student success, particularly for low-
income students.15 Grants also help address the low college-going rates of low-income students and
decrease wage gaps, which can improve their earnings prospects substantially. HECC reports that low-
income Oregonians are half as likely to enroll in an Oregon college or university as higher-income
Oregonians, but that Oregonians from low-income families are twice as likely to become middle- or
high-income earners by their mid-30s if they do enroll in college as young adults.
Oregon’s financial aid has risen in recent years and ranks relatively high per student nationally.
However, like student support services, financial aid does not cover the full student need and misses
some key student groups. Oregon Promise, the state’s newest program, has also shifted state aid away
from Oregon’s lowest income families.
Oregon’s financial aid has grown in recent years and is now relatively strong nationally
Oregon has two main financial aid programs for community college students:
• Oregon Opportunity Grants, offered since 1971, are available to students attending
Oregon colleges and universities. Of the more than 30,000 students who receive the
grants, about half attended community colleges. In the 2022-23 school year, students
received awards ranging from $1,500 to $3,600. This grant is need-based and supports
students from the lowest income families.
• Oregon Promise Grants, established in 2015, are awarded to students attending
community college directly after completing high school or a GED program. These grants
are not based on need — even students from families with higher expected family
contributions are eligible to receive them.16 Beginning in the 2022-23 school year, award
amounts for a full-time student range from $2,000 to $4,128 a year, the average tuition
charged by Oregon community colleges.
State appropriations for the two programs rose 68% from the 2015-17 biennium to a total of $242
million in 2021-23, including $200 million for the Opportunity Grants and $42 million for Promise Grants.
That increased investment has significantly improved Oregon’s standing relative to other states.
According to data from the State Higher Education Executive Officers Association, Oregon’s financial
aid funding for community college students ranked 10th to 12th among states from 2019 to 2021, based
on aid per student FTE. Thanks in part to the establishment of Oregon Promise, the percentage of first-
time, full-time students receiving state and local aid at Oregon's community colleges rose from 19% in
2014 to 56% in 2019, the fastest growth nationally.
Total costs of attendance — including rising tuition and high living costs — still exceed
available aid
Oregon community colleges’ average tuition and fees totaled $6,118 in the 2022-23 academic year — a
20% increase since 2017. This cost is the second highest among Western states. HECC officials say
15 In HECC’s 2021 study of the Oregon Opportunity Grant, new low-income community college students who received the grant
were more likely to return after one year than low-income students who did not (79.6% versus 76.7%) and more likely to
complete a certificate or degree (48.4% versus 44.6%).
16 Students’ Expected Family Contributions are estimates of what students and their families can pay for college. They are
calculated using information from federal or state financial aid applications.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 33
increased overall state funding has kept tuition lower than if state funding had remained static. Even
so, rising tuition and fees and Oregon’s high cost of living — 7th among states in a winter 2022 tally17 —
make it difficult for students to cover the total cost of attendance.
Total attendance costs include tuition, fees, and expenses such as textbooks and other school
materials, transportation, and room and board. In 2020-21, attendance costs totaled up to about
$24,000 a year at community colleges. A community college student receiving both the maximum
federal Pell Grants and Oregon Opportunity Grants would still be short more than $12,000 in covering
these costs.
HECC reports almost a third of community college students who filled out a FAFSA federal aid
application cannot meet costs even after accounting for grant aid, family contributions, and other
resources. HECC also reported that in 2020-21, the average debt among community college graduates,
even including those with no federal loan debt, was about $13,000. With median earnings of $43,183
five years after obtaining an associate degree, this is a sizeable financial load.
A White House initiative to forgive up to $20,000 in federal student loans for many students could help
address this problem, though it is facing legal challenges and does not address rapidly rising costs in
higher education.
State financial aid is not accessible to all Oregon students and a portion is distributed
inequitably
By statute, HECC prioritizes available state funds for Oregon Opportunity grant applicants with the
highest financial need, leaving out many eligible students due to overall limited funding. Many of the
groups for whom this grant improves affordability the most are historically underserved.
However, HECC reported that the Opportunity Grant went to less than a quarter of the more than
130,000 students eligible to receive it in 2021. Similarly, the non-need-based Oregon Promise grant has
capped funding based on family need due to limited state funding.
Many students are not eligible for one or both aid programs for reasons apart from financial need.
Students must attend at least half time to receive state aid. In addition, students returning to college
after time away are not eligible for the state’s Promise grant, as it is provided only to students who
have recently graduated from high school or completed a GED. HECC reported in December 2022 that
students with Promise grants make up only 13% of community college students.
The Promise grant was also established by statute with an inequitable structure. In 2021, HECC
reported more than 50% of recipients were low-income — generally defined as students eligible for the
federal Pell grant — but nearly 80% of the state’s program dollars went to higher income students. This
disparity is because students from low-income families are more likely than students from high-income
17 Missouri’s 2022 Q1 analysis of the national Council for Community & Economic Research survey.
“The hardest part of college should be academics, not trying to pay our tuition.”
- Nick Keough, University of Oregon student senator and former Lane Community College Student
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 34
families to receive other aid, and the Promise grant is a “last-dollar-in” program designed to make up
the difference between aid received and the state’s maximum aid cap. In 2020, students from the
lowest-income families received a total of $3,628 on average from state grants — over $200 less than
Promise students from middle and higher-income families. The imbalance also showed up in the
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System: From 2014 to 2019, state aid increased in every
income category, but Oregon had the second largest decline among states in the share of aid going to
students in the bottom income bracket. HECC research also indicates that Oregon Promise has not
increased community college enrollment, the number of terms students enroll in college, credits
earned, or college completion among recent high school graduates.
The Legislature took several steps in 2022 to address Oregon Promise’s equity issues, including
doubling the minimum grant award to $2,000 and lowering the GPA required to qualify for the grant.
These changes, however, are not projected to fully address program inequities. As of August 2022,
HECC estimated 52% of recipients will be low-income (versus 50% before the legislative changes) and
64% of the dollars will go to higher-income students (versus 80%).
The Legislature’s joint task force on underserved students also noted Oregon Promise’s limited focus
on underserved students and made many recommendations in the financial aid area. Among them, the
task force called for dramatically expanding need-based financial aid for low-income students and
working adults, expanding emergency financial aid, and expanding grants to help students who are
close to finishing complete their degrees or certificates.
In its budget request for the 2023-25 biennium, HECC proposed a $736 million increase in funds for the
Oregon Opportunity Grant, a major jump from the current $200 million funding level. The addition
would bring its funding for the need-based grant to levels comparable with the Washington College
Grant, funded at $884 million for the 2021-23 biennium. HECC also asked to increase funding for
Oregon Promise from $42 million to $86 million, in part to offer it to university students as well as
college students, and for $40 million in ongoing funding for Oregon Tribal Student Grants first
established in 2022.
HECC’s budget request says the increase in the Oregon Opportunity Grant would more than double the
amount of funding provided to community college students with the most need — from $3,600 per
student to $7,883, significantly more than tuition costs. This could help close aid gaps for vulnerable
populations and reduce the impact of inequities in the Oregon Promise program.
Despite increased state funding, Oregon colleges face substantial
threats to sustaining their operations and fiscal viability, with little
strategic assistance or oversight from the state
Falling enrollment and tuition revenue, rising costs, the loss of pandemic-related federal funding, and
other challenges threaten college budget sustainability, even with growing public support.
Oregon’s community college enrollment has fallen faster than in other states and its public funding has
risen. As a result, its overall public funding, staffing, and spending for community colleges is relatively
strong in national rankings when compared by full-time-equivalent students, used to standardize
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 35
comparisons across states.18 The increase in funding and spending helped contain tuition increases and
staffing losses. However, it may be difficult to sustain. For the 2023-25 biennium, colleges project a
need for a 44% increase in state operations funding jus to preserve the status quo.
Despite the high risk, HECC is not focusing on increasing the sustainability of college operations, and
accreditor focus on ensuring future sustainability is limited. In some areas, including monitoring financial
condition and evaluating spending, HECC has less statutory authority to monitor sustainability for
community colleges than it does for universities. In other areas, including shared services and
collaborative online education, HECC has statutory authority to encourage and facilitate changes, but
has had limited success in driving improvements. The lack of state-level strategic focus increases the
risk that college financial issues will not be addressed in a way that most benefits students.
Oregon’s community colleges have relatively strong overall funding, spending, and
staffing per student compared to other states, though state operations funding ranks
lower
Two national data sources — the State Higher Education Executive Officers Association and Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) — indicate Oregon’s overall funding for operations and
related spending is relatively strong when compared by full-time equivalent students. However,
Oregon’s state operations funding, a subset of total funding, ranks lower against other states despite
recent increases.
Our analysis of both national data sets was adjusted for inflation and cost-of-living differences among
states. The comparisons also focused on funding and expenses per full-time-equivalent student, which
is the primary basis for Oregon’s distribution of state funds, and not student headcount.19
Before the pandemic, from 2016 to 2019, Oregon’s community colleges ranked 12th nationally in total
revenues per student FTE, according to IPEDS data. Oregon ranked lower in state appropriations, 29th
over the four years, but ranked relatively high in property tax appropriations and tuition revenue.
The higher education association reported more recent data. During the pandemic, Oregon’s rank for
combined state and local funding reached about the national average and 19th highest among states in
2021, association data indicates. (Several large and well-funded state systems skew the national
18 Per-student-funding analysis can improve external state rankings. For example, a 2022 study and ranking done by WalletHub
ranks Oregon community colleges 10th across the nation as an overall system. Oregon’s relatively high state funding per student
FTE contributed to this ranking.
19 Per the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, part-time students in fall 2019 made up about 60% of student
headcount in Oregon versus 65% nationally, indicating Oregon does not enroll an unusually high proportion of part-time
students.
The State Higher Education Executive Officers’ funding rankings for Oregon’s public universities are much lower
than for its community colleges, driving down Oregon’s combined rankings for higher education. Similarly, the
percentage of institutional revenue covered by student net tuition and fees is much higher at public
universities – 69% in 2021 at the universities versus 25% at the colleges. In budget documents, HECC at times
reports only the combined figures.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 36
average upward.) As with the IPEDS data, property tax appropriations ranked higher and state
operations appropriations ranked lower, 25th in 2021.
State operations appropriations, along with state financial aid, have risen substantially in recent years,
from $550 million to $700 million from the 2015-17 biennium to the 2021-23 biennium, a 27% increase.
College officials note that much of the inflation-adjusted revenue gain since 2011 effectively recovered
earlier losses, and that colleges in areas where voters reject construction bonds have to cover repairs
and maintenance out of operations funds.
Figure 10: Inflation-adjusted state funding has increased substantially, but did not rise well above mid-2000
levels until the 2019-21 biennium
Source: HECC analysis
Consistent with funding results, Oregon ranked 15th highest nationally in total staff per student in 2019,
with both students and staff expressed in full-time equivalent terms. From 2014 to 2019, instructional
FTE reported by the colleges dropped, while some administrative categories rose, including
management and business operations, according to the IPEDS data.
By HECC’s calculation, from 2013 through 2019, the colleges’ student-to-staff ratio improved from 18.5
students per staff to 12.9, as enrollment dropped much faster than staffing.
Figure 11: Oregon ranks relatively high among states on overall staff FTE per student FTE, but has seen drops
in instructional staffing levels
2019 Staff FTE Oregon Rank 2014-19 Change
Total Staff FTE  7,412 15 -3%
Select Categories:
Instructional  3,052 23 -10%
Office & Administrative Support  1,101  7 -9%
Management   750 11  9%
Student and Academic Affairs   655 20  9%
Computer, Engineering, and Science   438  2  8%
Business and Financial Operations   272 24  16%
Source: Auditor analysis of data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
Spending per student is also relatively strong. IPEDS data indicates Oregon spent the 6th highest
amount per student FTE in current year expenses, primarily salaries and benefits for college employees,
$0
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
$5,000
$6,000
1999-01 2001-03 2003-05 2005-07 2007-09 2009-11 2011-13 2013-15 2015-17 2017-19 2019-21 2021-23
Inflation-Adjusted State Funding by Student FTE
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 37
from 2016 to 2019 combined. Employee fringe benefits, where Oregon ranked second highest
nationally, stood out the most. The high ranking likely stems from rising costs for health benefits and
Public Employee Retirement System costs, a challenge for Oregon government agencies in general.
We also analyzed more detailed individual college spending data the colleges provide to HECC to gauge
spending trends from 2009 to 2018, when all 17 colleges reported data. Over those ten years, the data
suggests that college spending on retirement, insurance benefits, and management salaries has grown
the fastest, more rapidly than spending on faculty and classified staff salaries.
Figure 12: Benefits and management salaries have grown fastest since 2009
2018 Total (millions) % Growth 2009-18
Faculty Salaries — Full & Part-Time $230 16%
Classified Staff Salaries  $152 18%
Management Salaries $98 33%
Insurance Benefits $95 50%
PERS $90 69%
Note: Percent growth not adjusted for inflation.
Source: Auditor analysis of HECC CCFIS data.
Unfortunately, other important expense line items in HECC’s publicly available dataset did not appear
reliable for analysis, including counseling, management of support services, and academic
administration. These accounts had missing data for some colleges or sharp fluctuations from year to
year, which may reflect inconsistent accounting. Several colleges also did not report any data for 2019
and 2020, making those years unusable for overall analysis.
HECC does not review college submissions to ensure they are complete and address reliability
problems. These problems limit the ability of HECC, colleges, and the public to evaluate college
spending even as risks to college sustainability grow.
Falling enrollment and growing financial challenges pose substantial threats to
sustaining college operations and meeting the state’s 40-40-20 goal
Despite Oregon’s relatively high per student funding and spending numbers, persistent enrollment
declines have driven down tuition revenue and total revenue at most Oregon colleges. The declines
threaten college finances and stability. They also limit Oregon’s ability to meet the college portion of its
40-40-20 goal, which is based on the number of students receiving associate degrees and certificates.
During the initial phase of the pandemic, enrollment fell as Oregon colleges closed in-person learning,
health issues spiked, and wildfires spurred evacuations across the state. Career-technical programs,
with their focus on hands-on learning, were hit the hardest. Strong job growth as the pandemic
continued may have also persuaded more students not to return or start in school.
A projected decline in the number of high school graduates could reduce enrollment further and
increase competition from universities, trade schools, and private online schools for the limited number
of students available. These trends are challenging community college finances. The colleges project a
need for a 44% increase in state funding for the 2023-25 biennium to avoid large tuition increases and
maintain status quo college operations.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 38
As with student success and funding, we benchmarked Oregon’s community college enrollment trends
against national results and trends in other states. Community college enrollment has declined rapidly
nationwide, much more deeply than public university enrollment, with losses accelerating during the
pandemic. As enrollment declines, tuition revenue does as well, limiting the colleges’ ability to maintain
a variety of program offerings and threatening college sustainability.
Benchmarking showed Oregon’s community college enrollment has fallen faster than enrollment in
most states, both before and during the pandemic.
• Before the pandemic, from 2014 to 2019, Oregon’s annual student FTE enrollment fell
roughly 20% versus 10% nationally, the 12th highest decline nationwide.
• From 2019 to 2021, Oregon’s annual student FTE enrollment fell 17%, more than double the
national average during the pandemic and the 6th highest drop among states.
Pre-pandemic, there was some encouraging news in the data: new students and first-time, full-time
students both grew, with Oregon ranking high in these categories relative to other states.
Figure 13: Reimbursable annual student FTE has declined significantly at most colleges
2021 FTE Enrollment 2011 to 2021 Change Pandemic Change
Total  64,815 -46% -21%
College:
Lane 6,088 -60% -21%
Umpqua 2,087 -59% -21%
Rogue 2,799 -55% -34%
Blue Mountain 1,164 -54%  -32%
Linn Benton 4,048 -50%  -22%
Treasure Valley 1,227   -49%  -18%
Chemeketa 7,368 -47% -23%
Southwestern 1,569 -46% -26%
Central Oregon 3,630 -45% -16%
Clatsop 830 -44% -38%
Clackamas 4,870 -44% -25%
Mt. Hood 5,994 -44% -19%
Portland 19,520 -38% -18%
Columbia Gorge 782 -38% -9%
Oregon Coast 417 -19% -10%
Tillamook Bay 429 -16% -11%
Klamath 1,993 1% 8%
Note: Pandemic change measures the change from the last academic year prior to the pandemic, 2018-19, to 2020-21, the last
year of annual enrollment data available.
Source: Auditor analysis of HECC data.
However, from 2010-11 to 2020-21, only Klamath Community College avoided a decline in reimbursable
student FTE enrollment, the basis of Oregon’s payments to the colleges. Twelve colleges had declines
of more than 40%. Declines were steeper among older students than traditional-age college students,
age 18 to 21, though traditional-age student FTE still declined by 29%.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 39
Oregon’s headcount enrollment far exceeds student FTE enrollment reimbursable by the state, at
nearly triple for the 2020-21 academic year. Students often need advising, financial aid, and other
administrative support services regardless of the number of courses they take, an important point for
colleges that need to support significant numbers of part-time students.
Oregon’s fall 2022 student headcount enrollment dropped 3.6% from Fall 2021, with declines at seven
colleges, while FTE rose 0.5% with 11 colleges stabilizing or showing an increase. While these numbers
show more stability than earlier in the pandemic, they are still below the national headcount average
for community colleges, which decreased by less than 1%.
Economic challenges and higher unemployment could prompt more students to enroll at community
colleges, as they did in economic downturns prior to the pandemic. However, demographers expect the
long-term supply of students to decline going forward. Data from the Western Interstate Commission
on Higher Education projects a total growth of nearly 20% in Oregon high school graduates in the 15
years ending in 2025, fueled by rapid growth in Hispanic, Asian, and Pacific Islander graduates. However,
in the decade from 2025 to 2035, the number of graduates is expected to drop 11%, including a 15%
decline in Hispanic graduates. For Oregon’s overall population, Portland State University population
researchers project Oregon will gain nearly 1 million residents from 2020 to 2045, but only 5% of them
will be younger than 30. The growth rate for the under 30 age group is projected at 3.5% through 2045,
much lower than overall population growth rate of 23%.
Nationally, Oregon also has relatively low, though rising, high school graduation rates and a low rate of
high school graduates attending college within 12 months.20 Both of these results also limit college
enrollment.
These trends are likely to increase competition for students among community colleges, universities,
private online schools, and career-technical or trade schools. It will also put further pressure on
community colleges and the state to keep tuition low even if enrollment continues to decline, putting
more pressure on their finances.
College financial challenges, which began pre-pandemic, are increasing
Data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System indicates the colleges’ financial
problems, as with their enrollment problems, began well before the pandemic. From 2014 to 2018, total
inflation-adjusted revenues fell at 14 of Oregon’s 17 colleges. Inflation-adjusted state appropriations
and property tax revenues grew at most colleges while student tuition and fee revenue and federal
grants and contracts declined. In the same period, 10 colleges reported declines in their net financial
position of at least 40% out of the 15 colleges that reported the sustainability metric.
During the pandemic, federal emergency funds helped bridge colleges’ budget shortfalls, but that
money is running out. Absent deep cuts, total college costs are expected to continue to rise, driven by
20 A 2019 analysis by HECC consultants found, based on 2016 data, that 49% of Oregon’s high school graduates enrolled in
college within 12 months of graduation, well below the national average of 63%.
Portland State University forecasts project Oregon will gain nearly 1 million residents from 2020 to 2045, but
only 5% of them will be younger than 30, with a growth rate in that category of only 3.5%.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 40
benefits and compensation. Colleges are taking steps intended to increase enrollment and improve
student retention, but absent unexpectedly large enrollment increases, tuition revenue is not likely to
rise enough to cover rising costs.
A review of college budgets indicates most colleges are not making substantial cuts for the 2022-23
school year. Some federal funds can still be used in 2022-23, and state funding for the year is already
set. However, some colleges made cuts earlier in the pandemic and some colleges are also making
relatively substantial reductions in 2022-23.
Reductions since the pandemic began include eliminating vacant positions, hiring and spending freezes,
separation incentives for faculty, reducing adjunct faculty, and reducing materials and maintenance
expenses. For 2022-23, Rogue Community College ended four academic programs and temporarily
suspended seven others as part of a prioritization plan. Blue Mountain Community College laid off five
full-time faculty after eliminating 39 full and part-time positions in the previous two years. Chemeketa
Community College eliminated 25 of 552 positions college-wide, mostly vacant positions but including
some layoffs. Lane Community College raised tuition by 5% and increased technology fees as part of
its plan to close an $8.1 million budget gap. Several colleges warned in their budget messages that
deeper cuts are looming for the 2023-25 biennium.
As college finances decline, HECC’s primary response is to request state spending increases to cover
college costs, limit staffing losses, and keep tuition from rising sharply. For the 2021-23 biennial budget,
HECC asked for an additional $57.2 million to cover college costs, including personnel costs, and keep
average annual tuition increases at or below 3.5% through 2023.
Operations deficits could be substantially worse in the 2023-25 biennium, starting in July 2023. College
projections for the 2023-25 budget, which the Legislature will consider in the first half of 2023, indicate
much higher needs for state funding to cover costs. The colleges project the state needs to increase its
Community Colleges Support Fund 44% for the 2023-25 biennium — from roughly $700 million to $1
billion — to maintain college employment and programs and keep average tuition increases at about
3% a year. That increase would only fund the status quo, maintaining existing services.
Blue Mountain’s Budget Struggles
The experience of Pendleton-based Blue Mountain, a small community college with roughly 2,400 for-credit
students, shows making deeper cuts will be difficult. The college’s 2022-23 budget cut five full-time faculty and
reduced the general fund budget for full-time faculty from $3.1 million to $2.4 million. The reductions prompted
student and faculty protests before a college board meeting and the faculty union to file grievances under its
collective bargaining agreement with the college, with union members saying the cuts would hurt students and
burden remaining staff. Blue Mountain’s president noted an enrollment drop of 42.5% since 2017, a shift away
from two-year degrees, and multiple years of General Fund budget cuts, He pledged to re-tool the college’s
strategy, including sunsetting academic programs that are no longer viable.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 41
Figure 14: Colleges project a need for more state funding to cover increased expenses, operations deficits,
and lost revenue
College Projections: 2023-25 Needs vs Revenues
Amount Change from 2021-23
Needs:
Expense increases for 2023-25 $221,160,090 12.2% increase
Deficit (uncovered expenses) 2021-23 biennium $98,826,447 Eliminated under college plan
Loss of federal pandemic relief money $53,036,148 Not available in 2023-25
Total projected needs $373,022,686
Revenue Changes:
Property tax increase (projected) $34,450,937 7.9% increase
Tuition revenue increase (projected) $30,796,690 6.6% increase
Other revenue decrease (projected) $(635,753) 1% decrease
Revenue subtotal $64,611,873
Difference: State revenues needed to fill gap $308,410,812 44.3% increase
Source: College submissions to HECC.
The proposed increase may not be funded. It is unknown what the Governor will recommend and the
Legislature will approve. HECC’s request budget, submitted in fall 2022, included a lower proposed
increase to $905 million, still a 29% increase, plus a proposal for $100 million in additional equity
funding for public universities and community colleges. In either case, the magnitude of the college
projections and HECC’s request highlights the deep financial problems the colleges face unless
enrollment increases substantially. The colleges’ projection assumes enrollment growth of only 1.3% to
1.4% a year from 2023 to 2025.
If successful, HECC’s separate $780 million request for additional financial aid for college and university
students could help spur enrollment growth, though it would also add substantially to the size of
HECC’s requested budget for higher education as a whole. All told, the 2023-25 higher education
request totals $5.3 billion, 48% higher than the 2021-23 adopted budget.
A lack of spending scrutiny and systemic focus on cost-saving measures increases the
risk college sustainability will not be adequately addressed
Growing instability at community colleges would damage students, the state’s economy, and the local
communities the colleges serve. Deep cuts could also hinder progress toward increased equity and
upward mobility in the state.
However, aside from requests for additional state funds for colleges and occasional one-time reports,
HECC is not focusing on college sustainability. It is not monitoring college finances, linking spending to
state goals, conducting data analysis to help colleges budget strategically, or helping to lead cost-
sharing initiatives — all steps that could help increase college sustainability.
Evaluations from the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, the higher-education
accreditor for Oregon and other Northwest states, also did not focus on strategic efforts to increase
sustainability. Accreditation standards require colleges to develop plans to address financial
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 42
sustainability. Our review of accreditation reports found accreditors check college annual audits,
reserves, and financial management practices, but do not focus on concrete strategies colleges are
taking to contain tuition, contain costs without reducing student success, and address threats to long-
term sustainability. Northwest Commission leaders said the pandemic spotlighted sustainability issues,
and their accreditation review teams are increasing scrutiny of sustainability issues going forward.
Sustainability areas where HECC could do more include:
Monitoring financial condition: State statutes require HECC to evaluate the financial condition of
Oregon’s public universities and require universities to submit reports on actions they have taken to
control costs to HECC. The statutes do not include these steps for community colleges. As noted
earlier, HECC obtains and publishes revenue and expense data from community colleges, but does not
review it or check it for accuracy.
Linking state funding to educational best practices and state goals: Improved reporting and analysis
could allow HECC to evaluate system spending and identify the best practices and funding needed to
reach state goals. Oregon’s K-12 system has a Quality Education Model to evaluate system spending
and estimate the educational best practices and level of funding needed to run a highly effective
system of schools in Oregon. HECC does project spending needed to meet 40-40-20 goals, but does
not tie spending to educational best practices or evaluate system spending.
Conducting data analysis to support sustainable college budgets: Colleges can struggle to make
evidence-based budget decisions. HECC’s standard reporting on program results reports results
statewide and does not include college-level analysis that colleges could use to help make budget
decisions. HECC also not provide guidance to help colleges make appropriate investments, evaluate
program results, implement best practices, or strategically reduce budgets.
Facilitating greater college efficiency: HECC’s statutory role does include “encouraging and
facilitating” shared services that improve economies of scale, such as shared administrative services or
collaborative online education among colleges. However, while state statutes require universities to
establish a collaborative focused on sharing administrative support services, there is no similar
requirement for community colleges. Despite its statutory role, HECC has had made limited efforts to
facilitate shared services and has had limited success when it does. Sharing services could result in
eliminating jobs and may be seen as a threat by the colleges, their staff, and employee unions.
A 2021 HECC report to the Legislature on mergers in higher education indicates troubled institutions
should act sooner rather than later to merge or seek structural partnerships and points to other state
actions. For example, Maine is sharing faculty members and courses across campuses. Connecticut
consolidated all 12 of its community colleges into an accredited institution and aligned curricula for
more than 200 degree programs.
Sustainability statutes for universities that do not apply to community colleges:
• HECC must evaluate the financial condition of the universities.
• Universities must submit reports on cost drivers to HECC.
• Universities must establish a collaborative focused on sharing support services.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 43
Colleges have independently made progress toward improving efficiency, but the efforts are limited in
scope. Institutional researchers at Linn-Benton Community College have contracted with a handful of
other colleges to provide basic student outcomes data, reducing the individual college burden. Several
smaller colleges are considering shared online course offerings. Other colleges have worked on a
shared, grant-driven project to improve and expand student opportunities in cybersecurity and
advanced manufacturing. Accreditation reviews indicate colleges are making more data-based efforts
to evaluate the effectiveness of academic programs.
Oregon’s community colleges have some existing advantages for addressing sustainability and student
success. Lower student-to-staff ratios maintained through relatively high funding could allow for
better connections between staff and students. Upgraded online capabilities spurred by the pandemic
could help the colleges devise more effective models for reaching students who struggle to attend on-
campus classes, including working students, students with children, and students with long commutes.
Oregon also has more older adults who attended college in the past but did not complete a program of
study – an opportunity to increase student enrollment. A 2019 report from the National Student
Clearinghouse Research Center identified Oregon as one of 12 states with a higher proportion of
students who have some college and no degree. These students have a high potential to return to
college and graduate, and most students do so at community colleges, the report noted.
Current piecemeal efforts, however, are likely not enough to address the sustainability risks colleges
face. In September 2022, the National Center for Higher Education Management Systems released a
higher education landscape study commissioned by Oregon’s colleges and universities that is a positive
step toward a more comprehensive approach. The report’s recommendations included enhancing
higher education affordability, making new investments aligned with state goals, and establishing a Blue
Ribbon commission, separate from HECC’s commission, to develop a vision for economic development
in the state and detail how higher education can better support economic growth.
The next biennium is critical, a time to recover from pandemic setbacks, strive for increased efficiency,
and assess the sustainability of the system going forward. For a more efficient, evidence-based, and
equitable system to emerge, Oregon state and college leaders will need to focus more intently on
addressing student success, student support, and college sustainability.
Oregon has a relatively high proportion of students with some college and no degree, a key source of potential
increased enrollment.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 44
Recommendations
These recommendations are tied to root causes and risks detailed in this audit report. Some may
require additional authority and staffing. Most will require consultation with stakeholders, including the
colleges, the Governor, the Legislature, and student and employee associations.
To increase community college accountability and student and college success, we recommend the
Governor’s Office and the Legislature:
1. Help HECC and the colleges make the improvements noted below. Provide clear support,
statutory language when needed, and necessary staff and funding at HECC and the colleges to
help drive system improvement.
To increase student success, student support and college sustainability, we recommend HECC:
2. Work with state leaders and stakeholders to substantially upgrade the community college
system’s transparency and use of data for improvement:
a. Publish student success metrics by college and statewide in an easily analyzable form,
such as downloadable spreadsheets or online dashboards. Starting with metrics
currently collected, include completion and transfer rates and rates for early student
progress indicators. Report results by race/ethnicity and other available demographics.
b. Work with the colleges to establish agreed-upon core student success metrics, both
early indicators and outcomes, and a consistent method for calculating them. Use them
to report to the public and Legislature on college and statewide performance, identify
successful programs, and evaluate strategic initiatives, including initiatives led by the
Oregon Student Success Center.
c. Benchmark statewide outcomes and early indicators against national results on HECC's
website and in reports to the Legislature. Develop Key Performance Measures for early
indicators.
d. Consolidate statewide data collection. Reduce duplicative requests and collection of
unused data. Clarify data definitions. Assist the Legislature with matching data
requests to existing data whenever possible. Align efforts with college accreditation
requirements.
e. Analyze staffing needs at HECC and community colleges and request staff needed to
support in-depth research, analysis, and public reporting.
3. If performance-based funding is adopted, develop a detailed plan to maximize and track
systemic benefits and minimize and track potential negative results. If performance funding is
not pursued, substantially increase strategic funds to improve student success and equity and
publicly track results of those efforts.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 45
4. Evaluate the sufficiency and effectiveness of statewide and college-specific student support
programs and academic advising. Include metrics such as funding, academic advisor caseloads,
students served by program, estimates of eligible students not served, and individual program
impacts on student success. Report results biennially to the Legislature and public, identifying
programs that work, service gaps, and sustainable options for closing them. Pursue legislative
support or statutory language as needed. Align efforts with college accreditation requirements.
5. Continue working with the Governor and Legislature to improve Oregon’s financial aid efforts,
including addressing inequitable distribution and gaps for part-time and older students.
6. Biennially analyze and report to the public and Legislature on community college sustainability
systemwide and by college — including financial status, expense and tuition growth, enrollment
trends and forecasts, and the status of shared services and other steps colleges are taking to
improve sustainability. Identify best practices and funding needed to reach state goals. Pursue
legislative support or statutory language as needed. Align efforts with college accreditation
requirements.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 46
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
Objective
The objective of this audit was to determine how HECC can help community colleges enhance data use
and student support to improve college performance, reduce equity gaps, and address substantial risks
to college sustainability.
Scope
The audit focused on the status of community college student success, equity gaps, student support
services, sustainability, and data use. It also focused on steps HECC can take to help colleges improve
in these areas and obstacles to improvement within the higher education system.
Methodology
To gain an understanding of HECC and community colleges we:
• Interviewed HECC and college leaders and staff, HECC commissioners, students, and
stakeholders;
• Surveyed and conducted group interviews with college institutional researchers, student
support personnel, and academic administrators;
• Visited Chemeketa, Klamath, and Portland community colleges;
• Reviewed extensive HECC and community college documentation and community college
research;
• Analyzed college accreditation reports;
• Reviewed practices in other states and in leading colleges in other states and interviewed
Washington state-level staff and college staff; and
• Analyzed multiple community college datasets, from HECC and from national sources, to
evaluate Oregon community college performance, funding, spending, staffing, and student
needs (see details in Appendix A).
Data Reliability
Our assessment of the reliability of data used in this audit focused on HECC’s internal data sets and the
external data sets outlined above.
HECC’s Student and Financial Data Systems
We evaluated data reliability by evaluating an assessment of reliability conducted by this office in a
2015 audit, reviewing up-to-date information about HECC’s data and systems, interviewing and
surveying HECC and community colleges officials knowledgeable about the data, and evaluating the
reasonableness of individual conclusions in our analysis preparation and review. We found the data on
college spending had limited reliability and confined our analysis to a level and time period deemed
reliable, as detailed in the Audit Results section.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 47
National datasets
We evaluated data reliability of national datasets we used for this report by evaluating the
methodology followed by the preparers of the datasets and evaluating the reasonableness of individual
conclusions in our analysis preparation and review.
After accounting for the limitations of HECC’s college spending data, we determined both the HECC and
national datasets were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. See “Appendix A: Data
Analysis Details” for more information on data analysis conducted for this audit, including data
limitations.
Internal control review
We determined that the following internal controls were relevant to our audit objective:21
• Control Environment
• We interviewed HECC commissioners and personnel at HECC and colleges and
reviewed statutes, administrative regulations, and HECC and college documents.
• Risk Assessment
• We interviewed personnel at HECC and colleges and reviewed statutes,
administrative regulations, key practices, and HECC and college documents.
• Control activities
• We evaluated procedures and practices for effective use of data to assess and
improve the community college system.
• Information and communication
• We evaluated the transparency and effectiveness of information provided about
the community college system.
• Monitoring activities
• We evaluated HECC’s role in monitoring and reporting the status and effectiveness
of college operations, including performance, funding, spending, and staffing.
Deficiencies with these internal controls were documented in the results section of this report.
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
We sincerely appreciate the courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of HECC
and Oregon’s community colleges during this audit.
21 Auditors relied on standards for internal controls from the U.S. Government Accountability Office, report GAO-14-704G.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 48
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor
of Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected
Secretary of State and is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
branches of Oregon government. The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers,
agencies, boards and commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Audit Team
Andrew Love, CFE, Audit Manager
Ian Green, M.Econ, CGAP, CFE, CISA, CIA, Audit Manager
Scott Learn, MS, CIA, Principal Auditor
Emily Fiocco, MPA, CIA, Staff Auditor
Zak Ostertag, MPP, Staff Auditor
Michael Pinkham, MPA, Staff Auditor
T. Cornforth, Staff Auditor
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 49
Appendix A: Data Analysis Details
We analyzed multiple datasets to evaluate Oregon community college performance, funding, spending,
staffing, and student needs. When possible, we also benchmarked these results against other states.
National Student Clearinghouse data on completion outcomes and enrollment
Completion: The National Student Clearinghouse separately gathers completion data directly from
community colleges and reports results by state. Its most recent report, for 2021, detailed six-year
completion rates over multiple years by state and disaggregated them by race/ethnicity. The report
also shows results by gender, age, and enrollment status (part-time or full-time). Student cohorts
include full-time and part-time “credential-seeking”22 students who started at the college six years
previously. Completion rates include completions at a community college as well as completions at a
four-year college if a community college student transfers to a university and graduates. This approach
provides a more complete picture of student success than other datasets we used, which count
transfers to universities as a success, regardless of student results once there. We analyzed results
from the 2021 report, including state rankings and trends over six years. National Student
Clearinghouse data is updated frequently, a significant strong point, but also focuses solely on
completion instead of detailing results on a broader range of outcomes and early momentum metrics.
NSC also reports disaggregated data by race and ethnicity, including groups that can have relatively
small student numbers and highly variable outcomes as a result. We averaged the three years of data
provided to help address this limitation.
Enrollment: We analyzed enrollment data for 2021. National Student Clearinghouse’s relatively rapid
release of national enrollment data for community colleges allowed us to analyze how Oregon’s
enrollment decline during the pandemic compared to declines in other states.
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System data on performance, funding,
spending, staffing, and enrollment
This federal database provides data on colleges, universities and other postsecondary institutions and
includes 966 public community colleges. We analyzed this data in three areas:
Funding and Spending: We determined community college funding and spending by line item by state,
then divided those totals by the state’s full-time student equivalent total for each year to obtain
comparable line-item results by state. We combined totals for 2016 through 2019 and averaged the
results to control for unusual year-to-year differences. We also adjusted the annual figures for inflation
and cost-of-living differences between states, allowing us to benchmark Oregon’s funding and
spending against other states.
Outcomes: Among other measures, this federal database provides three-year completion and transfer
rates to four-year colleges for smaller cohorts of community college students: first-time, full-time
credential-seeking students. We determined community college outcomes, such as rates of student
22 At community colleges, credential seeking means a student is seeking a certificate or degree. The National Student
Clearinghouse defines students as credential seeking if their early term enrollment is more than half-time or they enrolled half
time for at least two terms within 15 months of their initial fall enrollment. VFA and HECC define credential seeking by setting
thresholds for credits students earn.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 50
transfer to other institutions and completion — students obtaining associate degrees and certificates
— and benchmarked Oregon’s performance relative to other states. As with the NSC’s disaggregated
data, IPEDS outcomes for small, disaggregated groups can be highly variable from year to year. We
averaged results over four years to help address this limitation.
Enrollment and Staffing: We determined community college enrollment trends and staffing levels, such
as full-time versus adjunct faculty, and ranked Oregon’s staffing levels relative to other states.
Overall Methodology: We identified the set of all public community colleges in the United States based
on the April 2020 list prepared by the Community College Research Center at Columbia University. The
list adjusted for community colleges classified as four-year institutions under this data system because
they offer at least one four-year degree.
This long-running data system allows for comprehensive trend analysis and benchmarking. However,
the student cohort the system uses to evaluate student performance is limited, primarily focused on
first-time, full-time college students. This is a cohort that is most likely to succeed, but it also excludes
large categories of students, including part-time students and students returning to college.
Voluntary Framework for Accountability data on outcomes and early momentum
metrics
HECC provided us with statewide and student-level data it gathers for submission to the Voluntary
Framework for Accountability administrators, who collect data from about 230 member colleges on
performance outcomes. The outcomes include completion and transfer rates and early indicators, such
as students completing 12 credits in their first term or remaining in college from their first to second
term. Voluntary Framework for Accountability officials provided us with PDFs of statewide and
individual college results, which are also publicly available on their website.
We evaluated Oregon’s statewide six-year results as of 2019 and compared them to overall results for
colleges participating in the framework. We also used Oregon’s student-level data to evaluate results
on selected Early Momentum Metrics by race/ethnicity and by rural/urban designations.
The Voluntary Framework for Accountability system, implemented by the American Association of
Community Colleges, evaluates more comprehensive student cohorts than other datasets and focuses
on early indicators as well as final student outcomes, providing a more holistic picture of student
performance. However, the number of colleges used for comparison is limited, as is the data available
for benchmarking among states.
State Higher Education Executive Officers Association funding and enrollment data
This association provides state totals for funding and enrollment at postsecondary institutions,
including public community colleges, through its annual State Higher Education Finance report. We used
this data, which is adjusted for inflation and cost-of-living differences, as a second source for funding
analysis and benchmarking Oregon to other states, focusing on data from 2019 to 2021, the years that
the association provided separate analysis of community colleges and universities.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-35 | December 2022 | page 51
Hope Center student survey data on student challenges
The Hope Center conducts an annual survey of community college students on basic needs, using the
results to gauge levels of housing insecurity, food insecurity, and homelessness. We analyzed 2019
survey data to help determine need levels in Oregon, disaggregated by race and ethnicity. The
race/ethnicity results can be volatile from year to year, particularly for groups with relatively small
numbers in Oregon, such as Black/African American students, American Indian/Alaska Native students,
and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander students. Survey coverage of the nation’s community colleges is
also limited; the 2019 survey included only 14 of Oregon’s 17 community colleges.
Center for Community College Student Engagement national student survey data
The center, based at the University of Texas at Austin, provided national benchmark reports and
Oregon student-level data for two relatively recent surveys in which Oregon colleges participated: The
2021 Community College Survey of Student Engagement and the 2018 Survey of Entering Student
Engagement, which focuses on new students. We benchmarked Oregon results to national results and
analyzed the student-level data to identify how often students were using critical services, including
students disaggregated by race/ethnicity, gender and full-time versus part-time students. We also
analyzed these results by college. As with the Hope Center survey data, the race/ethnicity results can
be volatile from year to year, particularly for groups with relatively small numbers in Oregon.
HECC data for additional Oregon-specific results
HECC maintains an online, publicly accessible database, the Oregon Community Colleges Data Mart,
that includes a limited set of data on enrollment, student FTE, completions, developmental or remedial
education, financial aid expenditures, and annual revenues and expenditures. The data is provided by
college, goes back multiple years, and in many cases can be disaggregated by race/ethnicity, gender,
and age. We used the data to analyze enrollment trends. We also analyzed the spending data, but
limited our evaluation to specific statewide categories and those that appeared reliable, as HECC does
not review spending data submissions by colleges and the data had obvious missing information. In
2019 and 2020, for example, at least three colleges did not submit any data.
Enrollment and outcome data available in the Data Mart is drawn from HECC’s Data for Accountability
system, a student-level database that HECC uses to gather data from the individual colleges, including
data on outcomes, enrollment, and financial aid. HECC responded to a number of our specific questions
by drawing on this data, and also uses it to prepare reports for the public, Legislature, and the agency’s
commission, such as outcomes for transfer students and snapshot reports for colleges and the system
as a whole.
Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Office of the Executive Director
3225 25th Street SE
Salem, OR 97302
www.oregon.gov/HigherEd
December 13, 2022
Kip Memmott, Director
Secretary of State, Audits Division
255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 180
Salem, OR 97310
Dear Mr. Memmott,
This letter provides a written response to the Audits Division’s report entitled Oregon Must Improve Community
College Performance, Student Support, and Sustainability Amid Persistent Enrollment Declines.
In general, management of the Higher Education Coordinating Commission (HECC) agrees with the Secretary
of State Audits Division’s recommendations and is committed to taking actions to support the goals of
improving community college performance, student support, and sustainability amid persistent enrollment
declines. As described below, HECC may sometimes lack the statutory authority and/or the staff and resources
needed to undertake the recommended tasks.
This response letter reflects the perspective of HECC management. However, our Governor-appointed
Commission has final prerogative over many of the policy and funding actions envisioned here. While we
believe our response generally reflects the spirit and perspective of the Commission, we cannot commit current
or future members of the Commission to support these specific actions.
Recommendation 1 (made to the Governor’s Office and the Legislature):  Help HECC and the
colleges make the improvements noted [in the report].  Provide clear support, statutory language
when needed, and necessary staff and funding at HECC and the colleges to help drive system
improvement.
HECC Management Agrees.  Unusually for Oregon state agencies, HECC is restricted to exercising only the
powers, duties, and functions that have explicitly been granted to it by law. HECC’s authorities may be found
throughout ORS 350.075, the final section of which reads:
(8) (a) The Higher Education Coordinating Commission may exercise only powers, duties and
functions expressly granted by the Legislative Assembly. Except as otherwise expressly
provided by law, all other authorities reside at the institutional level with the respective
boards of the post-secondary institutions.
(b)   The commission has implied and direct authority to implement the powers, duties and
functions expressly granted to the commission by the Legislative Assembly.
(c)   Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this subsection, the commission may not exercise any
authority, express or implied, statutorily provided to a governing board of a public
university listed in ORS 352.002 or a community college operated under ORS chapter
341.
This statute has been interpreted by both the Oregon Department of Justice and Oregon’s seventeen community
colleges to limit our agency’s primary role to that of a coordinating commission.  As such, no matter how much
the HECC supports the Secretary of State’s recommendations to improve community college outcomes and
sustainability, implementing the recommendations is at present a shared responsibility of the HECC, local
community college boards, community college staff, accrediting institutions, and the Oregon Student Success
Center.
In addition, the HECC possesses neither the dedicated staff nor the financial resources to implement the
recommendations alone. To implement the more robust system of supports recommended in this audit would
likely require expanding the HECC’s authority, either by adding to its enumerated authorities, amending or
repealing the limiting language in ORS 350.075 (8), or both. Additionally, implementing this more robust
system would likely require expanding HECC’s capacity. As the audit notes, for example, the State of
Washington’s governing board for community colleges employs 239 staff, whereas Oregon employs just 20
staff focused on community college programs. Washington has five policy research analysts and a 13-member
data services team, whereas Oregon has approximately 1.25 FTE dedicated to community college data and
reporting.
Below is HECC’s detailed response to each recommendation in the audit.
RECOMMENDATION 2a
Publish student success metrics by college and statewide in an easily analyzable form, such as
downloadable spreadsheets or online dashboards. Starting with metrics currently collected, include
completion and transfer rates and rates for early student progress indicators. Report results by
race/ethnicity and other available demographics.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation Target date to complete implementation activities Point of
Contact
HECC management agrees
with this recommendation. We
note that HECC already
provides much of this
information through its annual
Statewide Higher Education
Snapshot reports. Raw data is
also available in an online,
searchable format through the
HECC Datamart if researchers
Much of the information requested in Item 2(a) has
been available to the public and to policymakers for
the last five years. HECC reports data on enrollment,
affordability, and other outcomes for resident Oregon
learners in aggregate, by institution type (university
and community college), and by individual institution.
It is further broken down by race and ethnicity to
highlight additional systemic barriers that are
experienced by underrepresented populations.
Amy Cox,
Director of
Office of
Research and
Data
503-569-2249
wish to explore different
research questions.
In 2023, HECC will explore
the potential for reporting
additional early indicators of
student success. We will also
post the data online in
spreadsheet form.
The HECC’s State Higher Education’s Snapshot
reports provide this information in a user-friendly
manner, and the HECC’s DataMart provides raw data
in an online, searchable format. In 2023, we will also
post this information online in spreadsheet form.
We will explore what it would take to provide
information on additional early indicators of student
success beyond the retention data we already report. If
this information is available, we will endeavor to
include it in our legislative presentations, including our
Ways and Means presentation in the spring of 2023,
and to make it available on the HECC website by the
summer of 2023 (see this commitment also in 2b and
2c).
Narrative for Recommendation 2a
HECC has provided much of the information noted in this recommendation for the last five years in its annual
Statewide Higher Education Snapshots, and the raw data is available to partners in an online, searchable format
through the HECC DataMart.
While we will continue to explore opportunities to build on published, static reports, we do not currently have
the financial or staff resources available to create interactive dashboards for use by the community colleges or
other researchers. We could envision this goal being built into future phases of HECC’s ongoing IT
Modernization project, but the project is currently not scoped to include this activity. As such, we do not believe
it is feasible to make substantial progress toward this part of the recommendation unless the agency receives
additional resources to support the recommendation.
RECOMMENDATION 2b
Work with the colleges to establish agreed-upon core student success metrics, both early indicators and
outcomes, and a consistent method for calculating them. Use them to report to the public and Legislature on
college and statewide performance, identify successful programs, and evaluate strategic initiatives, including
initiatives led by the Oregon Student Success Center.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete implementation
activities Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees with
this recommendation.
With respect to outcomes metrics, the
HECC already publishes and provides to
the colleges agreed-upon measures.
These both include and build on
measures of the Voluntary Framework of
Accountability (VFA) that the colleges
and HECC to use starting in 2015. As a
result of that collaboration, HECC
compiles and submits VFA data on the
colleges’ behalf. While the VFA website
publishes those results already, the
HECC could likewise publish college-
by-college reports that would perhaps
provide a more useful illustration of the
data for the Oregon public and decision-
makers.
With respect to early indicator metrics,
HECC regularly reports retention rates
based on the VFA cohort, and VFA
reports early indicators for each college.
HECC agrees that additional reporting
on additional early indicators could be
useful for colleges and the State.
While the HECC could evaluate Oregon
Student Success Center (OSSC)
initiatives, we lack the authority to
compel OSSC to provide HECC its data
or respond to HECC findings. OSSC
itself evaluates programmatic outcomes
at colleges; it would be important to
distinguish HECC’s evaluation of OSSC
efforts from OSSC’s own evaluations of
the institutions.
The Oregon Student Success Center
contracts out the types of institutional and
community college system evaluations that
are contemplated by this recommendation.
So, while the data exists, it is not made
available or discussed publicly, and it is not
shared with the HECC.
Absent new statutory language that
compelled the HECC to either collect or
report on existing data gathered by the
OSSC and evaluate their initiatives, we
believe ORS 350.075(8) provides a
statutory barrier that will prevent us from
implementing this portion of the
recommendation.
We will explore what it would take to
provide information on additional early
indicators of student success beyond those
we already report and to compare Oregon’s
results to national results.  If this
information is available, we will endeavor
to include it in our legislative presentations,
including our Ways and Means presentation
in the spring of 2023, and to make it
available on the HECC website by the
summer of 2023 (see this commitment also
in 2a and 2c).
Amy Cox, Director
of Office of
Research and Data
503-569-2249
Narrative for Recommendation 2b
While there is no nationally agreed-upon industry standard for student success metrics for community colleges,
Oregon worked with partners seven years ago to participate in the American Association of Community
Colleges’ metrics called the Voluntary Framework of Accountability (VFA). The state’s current list of Key
Performance Measures and other metrics that guide community college data collection and reporting work are
based on these measures. While we are willing to reconvene the group to build upon the already agreed-upon list
of success measures, we believe we would need enabling legislation to be the reporting authority for Student
Success Center activities.
RECOMMENDATION 2c
Benchmark statewide outcomes and early indicators against national results on HECC's website and in
reports to the Legislature. Develop Key Performance Measures for early indicators.
Agree or Disagree with Recommendation Target date to complete
implementation activities Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees with this
recommendation. We agree that early indicators of
student success are useful, and we report retention
rates for credential-seeking students annually. We
also agree that expanded benchmarking and
reporting on early indicators of student success
would provide colleges with information they
could use to support student success further.
HECC Management disagrees with the
recommendation to incorporate these measures
into the agency’s legislatively-adopted Key
Performance Measures (KPMs). HECC already
has 45% more KPMs than the Oregon Department
of Education (ODE), a much larger organization
running more statewide programs. Moreover, early
and intermediate indicators are less appropriate for
KPMs than measures of completion. We also note
there is no nationally accepted standard for early
indicators of student success in community
colleges.
The Legislative Fiscal Office and the Budget and
Management Division of the Department of
Administrative Services recommend KPMs be few
in number, identify performance targets to be
achieved during a two-year budget cycle, address
comparable information, and use standard
terminology and definitions.
We will explore what it would
take to provide information on
additional early indicators of
student success beyond those we
already report and to compare
Oregon’s results to national
results.  If this information is
available, we will endeavor to
include it in our legislative
presentations, including our
Ways and Means presentation in
the spring of 2023, and to make it
available on the HECC website
by the summer of 2023 (see this
commitment also in 2a and 2b).
In 2023, HECC will work to
publish 2- and 6-year completion
rates (as reported through VFA)
alongside national benchmarks.
HECC does not support creating
new legislatively-adopted KPMs
to measure early or intermediate
markers.
Amy Cox,
Director of Office
of Research and
Data
503-569-2249
Narrative for Recommendation 2c
The HECC reports retention rates of credential-seeking students publicly in its Statewide Higher Education
Snapshots and other reports. While there are other measures of student progress, the industry has not landed on
specific early indicators of success for community college students. If we can access the data locally and
nationally, we agree we should include it in our Ways and Means presentation in the spring of 2023 and make it
available to students and the public by the summer of 2023.
RECOMMENDATION 2d
Consolidate statewide data collection. Reduce duplicative requests and collection of unused data. Clarify
data definitions. Assist the Legislature with matching data requests to existing data whenever possible.
Align efforts with college accreditation requirements.
Agree or Disagree with Recommendation Target date to complete
implementation activities Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees with this
recommendation. While we understand community
colleges have limited staff and they often feel like
they receive duplicative requests, we believe this is
largely from requests originating from multiple
sources outside of HECC, such as the Oregon
Student Success Center, accreditation agencies, and
other researchers. We have no control over other
organizations and cannot impact or consolidate
requests they choose to make.
HECC can commit to streamlining our data
collection requests and already limit the data we
collect by performing periodic data maintenance.
Without additional staff, however, current reporting
will need to be paused to complete this work.
Though not the main source of data submissions for
the colleges, we do expect to begin significant work
on data definitions as we begin to implement
HECC’s new IT Modernization project.  We will
solicit input from the colleges on these definitions as
we determine what data we need to continue to
collect from community colleges related to financial
aid and the Eligible Training Provider List. And, we
will continue to make the Legislature, as well as
other partners, aware of available data whenever we
have the opportunity to do so.
HECC will continue to
evaluate our data requests on
an ongoing basis and will
eliminate any redundant or
duplicative requests as they
are discovered.
We will seek input from
community colleges as we
begin to create common data
definitions for the HECC
modernization project so that
it can capture data required for
statewide reporting.  We
anticipate this will begin
occurring during the summer
and fall of 2023.
Amy Cox,
Director of Office
of Research and
Data
503-569-2249
Narrative for Recommendation 2d
HECC will gladly join any collaborative efforts to streamline data collection and reporting practices. And, we
can commit to monitoring our requests to ensure that all parts of our requests are necessary. We will share
information we have about available data that can answer questions for the Legislature, the public, and our
stakeholders. However, we have no ability to influence the practices or requests originating from either
accreditation agencies or Oregon Student Success Center.
RECOMMENDATION 2e
Analyze staffing needs at HECC and community colleges and request staff needed to support in-depth
research, analysis, and public reporting.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete implementation
activities Point of Contact
HECC management agrees.  HECC
has submitted a 2023-25 Policy
Option Package entitled
Comprehensive Data and
Reporting to build research and
data capacity for the HECC. This
package was scoped to provide
state-level staff to perform ongoing
reporting needs. The investment is
not dedicated to community
colleges, but would have a positive
impact on measuring affordability,
equity goals, and increasing access
to interactive data.
While we support the
recommendation for the
Legislature to make additional
investment in the staffing levels at
community colleges, HECC does
not have the authority to dedicate
where additional investment should
or will be spent.
HECC allocates state funding to
the community colleges, but
colleges have the sole authority to
determine the number and types of
staff they employ with those funds.
The Research and Data Policy Option Package
was submitted with the 2023-
25 HECC budget.
It specifically requests six research positions
and proposes:
A. A legislative mandate for reporting
complete data on all learners from all
postsecondary educational institutions
and training programs with staff to
manage new collections. This policy
would require comprehensive, student-
level data on all learners at all
postsecondary institutions and
programs.
B. Resources to assess the college
affordability crisis, evaluate progress
toward equity, and assess workforce
training programs in concert with
Future Ready Oregon and educational
reporting.
C. Resources to provide parallel data
across all postsecondary sectors in a
publicly searchable way. This
component would standardize
measures across the span of
postsecondary education and training
programs and data collections and
provide publicly accessible,
transparent data in a timely and
dynamic format not possible in
existing static reports.
Amy Cox,
Director of Office
of Research and
Data
503-569-2249
If funded, we will begin the work of hiring
staff and contracting for system supports in
the Summer of 2023.
Narrative for Recommendation 2e
We strongly agree that HECC and Oregon’s community colleges would benefit from a significant increase in
funding to support comprehensive data collection and analysis. Most research and data positions are established
within specific programs and are responsible for specific reporting requirements. HECC struggles to meet the
existing expectations of the Legislature and other stakeholders, but would welcome the opportunity to do more
proactive work that directly benefits Oregon colleges and their students.
RECOMMENDATION 3
If performance-based funding is adopted, develop a detailed plan to maximize and track systemic benefits and
minimize and track potential negative results. If performance funding is not pursued, substantially increase
strategic funds to improve student success and equity and publicly track results of those efforts.
Agree or Disagree with Recommendation Target date to complete
implementation activities Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees. If the HECC decides
to include outcome (or performance) metrics within its
formula for allocating state funding to community
colleges, it will make every effort to maximize benefits
and minimize negative results. We will track the results
and report to the Commission on both intended and
unintended consequences of the decision.  If there are any
unintended consequences, we will bring those back to the
Commission for discussion and potential corrective
actions.
We do not anticipate increasing the size of the strategic
fund without consultation with the colleges. Allocating a
larger share of the Community College Support Fund to
the strategic fund would not increase overall funding;
instead, it could have a hydraulic effect by reducing
funding for basic operational needs, thus potentially
affecting sustainability goals for both the system and for
individual colleges alike.
The Community College
Support Fund Review
Workgroup will make
recommendations to
HECC staff who are on
track to present their
recommendations on
formula changes and
potential performance-
based funding by the
Commission’s February
2023 meeting.
If approved by the
Commission, an amended
formula will be used to
determine the quarterly
distribution amounts
beginning in July 2023.
In Spring, 2023 HECC
staff will consult with
community college
leadership about the size
Jim Pinkard,
Director of
Postsecondary
Capitol and
Finance (503) 559-
9075
of the strategic fund for
2023-24.
Narrative for Recommendation 3
HECC staff is working closely with a workgroup that has been charged with making recommendations about
potential changes in the formula that determines the distribution of the Community College Support Fund. The
workgroup is meeting regularly to analyze other state’s performance funding models and to determine what
specific goals or activities Oregon would like to incentive. The HECC has identified policy principles for this
work; the workgroup has identified additional principles for the implementation of any formula changes. HECC
staff will make recommendations to the Commission on potential formula changes, currently scheduled for the
February 2023 meeting.
The HECC’s policy principles for the distribution formula include that it should:
1. Align with state goals and priorities.
2. Hold true to the broad mission of community colleges, including access, completion and workforce
development.
3. Reflect the diversity across colleges, including region, missions, and student bodies.
4. Incent and support institutions to invest in student success and evidence-based practices.
5. Prioritize equitable student access and success by factoring in differential needs and costs among
student groups.
The workgroup recommends that implementation principles for the distribution formula include that it should:
1. Be stable and predictable.
2. Provide sufficient core funding to support operations and maintenance for all colleges.
3. Be simple to understand and easy to explain to a diverse group of state, campus, and community
stakeholders.
4. Use data that are valid, reliable and consistently available.
5. Be phased-in to allow institutions to respond/avoid unintended consequences.
6. Be reviewed regularly (at least every 3 years) to strengthen the model and address any unintended
consequences.
We are confident this work will result in an approach to distributing state funding that recognizes the diverse
roles community colleges play in their communities and the state priorities to which they all contribute.
RECOMMENDATION 4
Evaluate the sufficiency and effectiveness of statewide and college-specific student support programs and
academic advising. Include metrics such as funding, academic advisor caseloads, students served by
program, estimates of eligible students not served, and individual program impacts on student success.
Report results biennially to the Legislature and public, identifying programs that work, service gaps, and
sustainable options for closing them. Pursue legislative support or statutory language as needed. Align
efforts with college accreditation requirements.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees
with this recommendation.  HECC
does not currently possess
information about community
college staffing decisions or models,
the authority to evaluate wraparound
support services for programs that
we do not fund directly, or data on
student support services. These
responsibilities fall to the boards
and staff of locally-governed
community colleges.
However, HECC does provide a
limited amount of direct funding
and have proposed several Policy
Option Packages that support these
types of services and commits to
evaluating how well these student
support programs achieve their
stated goals.
If the Legislature appropriates
specific funding to HECC for
expanding student support services
at community colleges – such as
proposed in the HECC’s student
equity POP or by expanding the
pandemic-inspired “Strong Start”
program that began last biennium at
the universities -- we will develop
evaluation and reporting criteria and
include it in the contract language in
the summer of 2023. We will
include information on the
effectiveness of these program in
program reports.  If these programs
demonstrate the positive results we
expect, we will use the data reported
to HECC to determine whether we
pursue new support programs in
future biennia.
Donna Lewelling, Director of
the Office of Community
Colleges and Workforce
Development
(503) 559-4340
Narrative for Recommendation 4
HECC will commit to evaluating the effectiveness of student-centered wraparound services that we fund for
community colleges in the future. If the results are positive, we will use the data to guide our policy decisions
about requiring and/or supporting these support services in the future.
RECOMMENDATION 5
Continue working with the Governor and Legislature to improve Oregon’s financial aid efforts, including
addressing inequitable distribution and gaps for part-time and older students.
Agree or Disagree with Recommendation Target date to complete
implementation activities
Point of
Contact
HECC management agrees. HECC will
continue to promote financial aid solutions that
benefit students with the highest need. We will
build on the positive changes we made to the
Oregon Opportunity Grant last biennium and
HECC submitted multiple Policy Option
Packages designed to close the
affordability gap for the state’s neediest
students in August 2022.
Juan Baez-
Arevelo,
Director of
Oregon Student
continue to advocate for permanent solutions
that make education and training more
affordable.
Our Commission’s two highest priorities
when we submitted the HECC’s Agency
Request Budget were Policy Option Package
101, Oregon Tribal School Grant, and Policy
Option Package 102, Oregon Opportunity
Grant/Oregon Promise Grant Expansion
Package.
POP 101 seeks to continue a program that
was established in 2022 that pays all college-
related expenses—including tuition, housing,
books, and other costs not covered by other
grants—for eligible students who are
enrolled members of Oregon’s nine federally
recognized tribes.  This program will correct
disparities caused by systemic barriers to
access postsecondary education for Oregon’s
tribal students.
POP 102 increases state financial aid support
to Oregon Opportunity Grant and Oregon
Promise students, provides tiered awards
based on level of need, and removes barriers
to nontraditional learners. This request would
make significant gains in closing the
affordability gap for most Oregonian and
tiered awards would differentiate according
to need for state assistance.
They included:
101:  Oregon Tribal School Grant
102:  Oregon Opportunity Grant/Oregon
Promise Expansion
103:  ASPIRE/FAFSA
104:  Grants to Students for Child Care
105:  Oregon National Guard Student
Tuition
Assistance
201:  Student Equity
202:  Open Educational Resources
302:  Early Learning Educator Grants
304:   AmeriCorps Education Incentives
406:   Future Ready Oregon
The various packages support a number
of historically underserved Oregonians,
including low-income students, student
parents, veterans, AmeriCorps
volunteers, and students of color.
HECC staff will spend the next six to
eight months advocating for the passage
of any and all POPs that are included in
the Governor’s recommended budget
and will implement program changes
when they are approved by the
Legislature.
Access and
Completion
(503) 508-3978
Narrative for Recommendation 5
Closing the affordability gap, especially for underrepresented and non-traditional students, is one of HECC’s
highest priorities. We know these policy decisions would make a huge difference for students; however, they
require ongoing investments by Oregon legislators, which can be difficult to sustain when resources are scarce.
HECC uses data, as well as student testimonials, to make sure that we convey the various ways the state benefits
when we invest in postsecondary education.
RECOMMENDATION 6
Biennially analyze and report to the public and Legislature on community college sustainability
systemwide and by college – including financial status, expense and tuition growth, enrollment trends and
forecasts, and the status of shared services and other steps colleges are taking to improve sustainability.
Identify best practices and funding needed to reach state goals. Pursue legislative support or statutory
language as needed. Align efforts with college accreditation requirements.
Agree or Disagree with Recommendation
Target date to
complete
implementation
activities
Point of Contact
HECC management partially agrees.
Every two years, HECC’s staff spends a large
part of its Ways and Means presentation
reporting trends in student tuition and fees,
level of state investment, costs borne by
students and their families, trends in operating
costs, and describing various policies that could
help to bridge the affordability gap. In addition,
we make recommendations on the level of
operating support funds required to maintain the
current level of service at community colleges.
We do not specifically address the fiscal health
or financial sustainability of individual
community colleges because under current law
that is primarily the responsibility of the local
boards.  We provide this information for public
universities, but only as a result of a budget
note that directed us to report the information to
the Legislature.
If the Legislature determines that HECC should
undertake college-specific financial reporting
and analysis, we would welcome this additional
responsibility.
If the Legislature
enacted a law that
directed the HECC to
provide a report on
financial sustainability
or to broker shared
services for the
community college
system, HECC would
comply with the
directive.  Until then,
we believe we lack the
authority to secure the
information and we
would be encroaching
on the responsibilities
specifically given to
colleges’ local boards.
Should the Legislature
choose to enact such a
law, HECC would
require additional staff
to conduct the in-depth
analysis and
corresponding
coordination activities.
Donna Lewelling, Director of
the Office of Community
Colleges and Workforce
Development
(503) 559-4340
Narrative for Recommendation 6
HECC management would be pleased to provide information on the community colleges’ fiscal health and
financial stability if the Legislature directed us to provide that information. Until then, we must respect the fact
that local boards are responsible for tracking and making decisions that support colleges’ financial
sustainability.
Historically, HECC has offered to broker shared services that could benefit community college students. It has
proven difficult to make these opportunities attractive enough for the colleges to spend the time and effort
necessary to collaborate on shared systems. In 2020, we offered $2 million to any higher education institution
that wanted to take the lead in developing a shared on-line course curriculum. We solicited interest twice and no
institution stepped forward to participate. We ultimately had to fail the solicitations and recruit rural community
colleges to lead the effort. However, it has not resulted in the statewide online course curriculum that we had
hoped to create through the opportunity.
HECC does not have the legal authority to compel colleges to participate in shared systems. We must rely on
our persuasive abilities to convince colleges that they will receive a benefit that is robust enough to outweigh the
perceived cost of participation and the potential loss of control of the service. At times, this is challenging to
achieve given the HECC’s limited statutory authority.
Please contact Ramona Rodamaker, Deputy Executive Director at (971) 301-1708 with any questions.
Sincerely,
Ben Cannon
Executive Director
This report is intended to promote the best possible
management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits