Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021
Department of Consumer and Business Services
350 Winter St. NE
Salem, OR 97309
Page i
Table of Contents
FINANCIAL SECTION:  Page
I. INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 1
II. BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
a. Balance Sheet 3
b. Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balance 4
c. Notes to the Basic Financial Statements 5
III. Other Reports:
a. Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance 10
and Other Matters
Shemia Fagan Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
Andrew Stolfi
Director, Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services
Report on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace, a
governmental fund of the State of Oregon, Department of Consumer and Business Services, as of and
for the year ended June 30, 2021, and the related notes to the financial statements, as listed in the
table of contents.
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America; this includes
the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair
presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit. We
conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards,
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from
material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or
error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity's
preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in order to design audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity's internal control. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also
includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation
of the financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
respective financial position of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace, a governmental fund of the
State of Oregon, Department of Consumer and Business Services, as of June 30, 2021, and the
respective changes in financial position thereof for the year then ended in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
a governmental fund of the State of Oregon, Department of Consumer and Business Services, and do
not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the State of Oregon or the
Department of Consumer and Business Services as of June 30, 2021, or the changes in its financial
position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Our opinion is not modified with respect to this matter.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated April 28,
2022, on our consideration of the Department of Consumer and Business Services’ internal control over
financial reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations,
contracts, and grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe
the scope of our testing of internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of
that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the Department of Consumer and
Business Services’ internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral
part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the
Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace’s internal control over financial reporting and compliance.
State of Oregon
April 28, 2022
Balance Sheet
Governmental Fund
June 30, 2021
ASSETS 2021
Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 5,767,246
Accounts Receivable 299,688
Total Assets $ 6,066,934
LIABILITIES AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Accounts Payable $ 25,150
Due to Other Funds 100,965
Other Current Liabilities 166,779
Total Liabilities 292,894
Fund Balance:
Restricted for Health Insurance Marketplace 5,774,040
Total Fund Balance 5,774,040
Total Liabilities, and Fund Balance $ 6,066,934
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balance
Governmental Fund
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Revenues: 2021
Assessments $ 6,326,278
Interest and Investments 70,841
Federal Revenue 31,569
Total Revenues 6,428,688
Expenditures:
Current:
Salaries and Wages 2,353,076
Services and Supplies 2,375,843
Special Payments 656,664
Total Expenditures 5,385,583
Excess (Deficiency) of Revenues Over (Under) Expenditures 1,043,105
Other Financing Sources (Uses):
Transfer to General Fund (Note 7) (3,800,000)
Total Other Financing Sources (Uses): (3,800,000)
Net Change in Fund Balance (2,756,895)
Fund Balances - Beginning 8,480,199
Prior Period Adjustment (Note 9) 50,736
Fund Balances - Adjusted 8,530,935
Fund Balances - Ending $ 5,774,040
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
A – Purpose of Organization
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 required each state to establish
a health insurance marketplace, an online marketplace that enables individuals and employers
to shop, compare plans, and access financial assistance to help pay for insurance coverage.
States were permitted to implement their own marketplaces (referred to as state- based
marketplaces or SBMs) , choose to have a hybrid marketplace (referred to as state- based
marketplaces using the federal platform or SBM-FPs), or states could elect to participate in the
federal marketplace (referred to as the federally f acilitated marketplace or FFM). Oregon first
elected to implement a  state-based marketplace to meet the unique needs of Oregonians and
its insurance market. In late 2014, Oregon transitioned into a SBM-FP.
In 2011, Senate Bill 99 established the Oregon Health Insurance Exchange Corporation (Cover
Oregon) as a public corporation to be governed by a board of directors. Upon implementation,
Cover Oregon was fully dependent on federal grant funding for its operational expenditures
through Dec. 31, 2014, and partially thereafter.
In 2015, SB 1 abolished Cov er Oregon and its board of directors, and transferred its duties,
functions, and powers to the Department of Consumer and Business Services (DCBS),  an
existing state agency. The SBM -FP, within DCBS  – Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
(OHIM) – currently is fully self-funded, using per-member-per-month (PMPM) assessments for
operations. These financial statements are representative of OHIM  only, a program within
DCBS.
SB 1 also established the Health Insurance Exchange Fund , also known as the Marketplace
Fund. Oregon Revised Statute 741 restricts the use of these funds to the operation of OHIM.
The Marketplace Fund is a special revenue fund that is used to account for and report the
proceeds of specific revenue sources that are restricted or committed to expenditure for
specified purposes other than debt service or capital projects. The activities of this fund are rolled
up into the Consumer Protect ion special revenue fund for the statewide financial reporting
purposes.
B
– Basis of Accounting
The accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace are
reported using the current financial resources measurement focus and the modified accrual
basis of accounting. These financial statements have been prepared in conformity with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the United States of America for governmental funds.
Revenues are recognized when they are both measurable and available. Revenues are
considered available when they are collectible within the current year or soon enough thereafter
to pay liabilities existing at the end of the year. For this purpose, revenues are considered
available if they are collected within 90 days  of the end of the current fiscal year. Expenditures
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
generally are recognized when a liability is incurred, as under accrual accounting. Revenues for
OHIM come from PMPM assessments from insurance carriers that participate in the OHIM
program.
Accordingly, revenues are recorded when earned, and expenditures are recorded when a liability
is incurred, regardless of when cash was received or paid.
C – Deposits and Investments
Cash deposits that are held in a cash management or investment pool are classified as cash
and cash equivalents when the pool has the general characteristics of a demand deposit
account. Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and investments held by the office of the
State Treasurer in the Oregon Short Term Fund (OSTF). Additional information about the OSTF
can be found in the OSTF financial statements at
https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/public-financial-services/oregon-short-term-
funds/pages/default.aspx
D – Receivables & Payables
Receivables consist of revenues earned or accrued in the current period and are shown net of
estimated uncollectable accounts. Payables consist of amounts owed to vendors for operational
expenditures and other state agencies for services received.
E
– Use of Estimates
OHIM used estimates and assumptions in preparing financial statements in accordance with
GAAP. The preparation of the financial statements required management to make certain
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenditures  during the
reporting period. As such, actual results could differ from the estimates included in the
accompanying financial statements.
F
– Fund Balance
The difference between assets and liabilities, plus deferred inflows of resources, is labeled “Fund
Balance” on the financial statements. The Health Insurance Exchange Fund balance is
restricted. Restricted fund balances are the result of constraints imposed by the law through
constitutional provisions or enabling legislation or by parties outside state government, such as
creditors, grantors, contributions, or laws or regulations of other governments.
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Note 2 – Deposits and Investments
OHIM Participation in the Oregon Short-Term Fund Held at Treasury
The Oregon State Treasury  maintains the Oregon Short -Term Fund (OSTF), a cash and
investment pool that is available for use by the Marketplace Fund. Because the pool operates
as a demand deposit account, the Marketplace Fund  portion of the OSTF is classified on the
financial statements as cash and cash equivalents.
Custodial Credit Risk for Deposits
The custodial credit risk for deposits  is the risk that, in the event of a depository financial
institution failure, OHIM will not be able to recover deposits that are in the possession of an
outside party. OHIM  does not hold any deposit s or investments outside of the Oregon State
Treasury. Deposits held by the Oregon State Treasury are either insured or collateralized under
the Public Funds Collateralization Program.  For more information, refer to the Oregon State
Treasury  website at
https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/public-financial-services/public-
depository-information/pages/default.aspx. B anking regulations and Oregon law establish the
insurance and collateral requirements for deposits in the OSTF.
The OHIM bank balance at the Oregon State Treasury was $4,939,724 as of June 30, 2021.
Investments
OHIM has investments only in OSTF held by the Oregon State Treasury.
Note 3 – Receivables and Payables
Receivables
The following table disaggregates receivable balances reported in the financial statements as
accounts and other receivables at June 30, 2021.
Receivables
Governmental Activities T otal
Insurer assessment receivable $ 290,688         166,046          456,734
Allowance for doubtful accounts (166,046)        (166,046)
McGuireWoods Reimbursement 9,000 9,000
Total Receivable, net $ 299,688         -                  299,688
Accounts
Receivable
Other
Receivable
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Payables
The following table disaggregates payable balances reported in the financial statements as
accounts payable and other current liabilities at June 30, 2021.
Note 4 – Risk Management
OHIM is subject to the risk of loss from various events, including, but not limited to, natural
disasters, destruction of assets, errors, omission, and injuries to employees. To mitigate the risk
of loss from various events, OHIM  participates in and is  covered under the State of Oregon’s
self-insurance and commercial insurance program as administered by the Dep artment of
Administration Services  (DAS) Enterprise Goods and Services Division, Risk Management
Section. As such, OHIM  is responsible to provide updated property, equipment, and fixture
values to DAS Risk Management.
Note 5 – Assessment Revenue
Each year by March 31, the per-member-per-month medical and dental assessment rates need
to be set for qualified health plans sold through the federal exchange. The rates are set to cover
OHIM’s planned expenditures for that plan year.  There is a risk to assessment revenues from
federal or legal actions that may reduce enrollment in qualified health plans.  For calendar year
2020 and 2021, the rates will remain at $5.50 for medical and 36 cents for dental. For calendar
year 2022, the rates will remain at $5.50 for medical and 36 cents for dental.
Note 6 – Insurance Providers Rebate
Oregon Revised S tatute (ORS) 741.105(3)(b) limits OHIM ’s fund balance to six months of
expenditures. Anything beyond six months of expenditures will be credited to insurers in a
manner described in Oregon Administrative R ule (OAR) 945-030-0020. The distribution of the
credit is based on the billing date and billed amounts during the 2017-19 biennium for firms that
were offering plans through the end of the biennium. The monthly credit is the total rebate , per
insurer, divided over 12 months. The 2019- 21 biennium total rebate for insurance providers is
$4,163,015. Of the total 2019-21 biennium rebate, $2,081,501 was for July through December
2020. The rebates  have been applied to insurers’ monthly invoices.
Payables
Governmental Activities Total
General Operation $ 7,162              131,622          138,784
Special Payment 17,988           35,157            53,145
Total Payable $ 25,150           166,779          191,927
Accounts
Payable
Other Current
Liabilities
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Note 7 – Fund Sweep
In 2019, the Oregon Legislature passed House Bill 2377. Section 5 of HB 2377 requires OHIM
to transfer $3,800,000 to the State of Oregon General Fund on May 31, 2021.  This was
completed by the program as directed in the bill.
Note 8 – Transfer of OHIM program to the Oregon Health Authority (OHA)
During the 2021 legislative session, Senate Bill 65 passed. This bill directed the transfer of the
OHIM program, including its resources and liabilities, to the Oregon Health Authority ( OHA).
OHIM program staff expenses were transferred to OHA on July 1, 2021. DCBS and OHA entered
an interagency agreement (IAA) for DCBS to continue administrative services to support OHIM
during the 2021-2023 biennium to facilitate a smooth transition while ensuring that OHIM is able
to complete a successful open enrollment season.
Note 9 – Prior Period Adjustment
Expenditure adjustments were made as part of the OHIM chargeback in fiscal year 2021. Some
of the adjustments were for chargeback expenditures related to the prior fiscal year.
OHIM received Federal Coronavirus Relief Fund  (CRF) reimbursement in fiscal year 2021.
Some of the reimbursement was for fiscal year 2020 expenditures, and these were considered
prior period adjustments for fiscal year 2021.
Chargeback Correction     (9,120)
CRF Reimbursement     59,856
50,736
Shemia Fagan Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control Over
Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters
Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in
Accordance with Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
Andrew Stolfi, Director, Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the Oregon Health
Insurance Marketplace (OHIM), a governmental fund of the State of Oregon, Department of Consumer
and Business Services (the department), as of and for the year ended June 30, 2021, and the related
notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise OHIM’s basic financial statements, and
have issued our report thereon dated April 28, 2022.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the department’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) related to OHIM as a basis for designing audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the
financial statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
department’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the
department’s internal control.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or
detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and
corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention
by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this
section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material
weaknesses may exist that have not been identified.
Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the department’s financial statements of the
OHIM are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have
a direct and material effect on the financial statements. However, providing an opinion on compliance
with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an
opinion. The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are
required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in
accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s internal control and
compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
April 28, 2022