State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
An Investment Pool of the State of Oregon
Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
This page intentionally left blank
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................... 1-3
Financial Statements:
Statement of Net Position .......................................................................................................... 4
Statement of Changes in Net Position ....................................................................................... 6
Notes to Financial Statements .............................................................................................. 8-12
Other Reports
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
and on Compliance and Other Matters .................................................................................... 14 -15
This page intentionally left blank.
Shemia Fagan Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Kate Brown
Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements
Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, an external investment
pool of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2022, and the related notes to the
financial statements, as listed in the table of contents.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, as of June 30, 2022, and the
changes in its financial position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Our responsibilities under those
standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
section of our report. We are required to be independent of the Oregon State Treasury and the Oregon
Intermediate Term Pool, and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in accordance with the relevant
ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is
sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool and do
not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the Oregon State Treasury or the State
of Oregon as of June 30, 2022, or the changes in its financial position for the year then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our opinion is
not modified with respect to this matter.
Responsibilities of Management for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America , and for the
design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair
presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error.
Auditor’s Responsibility for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that
includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is n ot absolute assurance and
therefore is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing
Standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The risk of not detecting a material
misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve
collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
Misstatements are considered material if there is a substantial likelihood that , individually or in the
aggregate, they would influence the judgment made by a reasonable user based on the financial
statements.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards, we
• exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
to fraud or error, and design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such
procedures include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and the
disclosures in the financial statements.
• obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control. Accordingly, no
such opinion is expressed.
• evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall presentation of the
financial statements.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other mat ters,
the planned scope and timing of the audit, significant audit findings, and certain internal control-related
matters that we identified during the audit.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated
September 15, 2022, on our consideration of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial
reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and
grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our
testing of internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not
to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial
reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards in considering the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over
financial reporting and compliance.
State of Oregon
September 15, 2022
State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2022
(Dollars in Thousands)
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents 4,050$
Investments 303,154
Due from Broker on Sale 11,685
Accrued Interest Receivable 1,603
Total Assets 320,492
Liabilities:
Payable for Investments Purchased 9,939
Total Liabilities 9,939
Net Position:
Held in Trust for Participants 310,553
Total Net Position 310,553$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
This page intentionally left blank
State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Changes in Net Position
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
(Dollars in Thousands)
Additions
Investment Earnings:
Interest, Dividends and Other 7,940$
Net Decrease in Fair Value of Investments (33,091)
Securities Lending Income 14
Total Investment Earnings (25,137)
Less Investment Costs:
Investment Activity Costs (Note 4) 234
Securities Lending Costs 4
Net Investment Earnings (25,375)
Participant Account Transactions:
Participants' Contributions 94,462
Participants' Withdrawals (59,820)
Net Increase as a Result of Participant Transactions 34,642
Change in Net Position Held in Trust for Participants 9,267
Net Position - Beginning 301,286
Net Position - Ending 310,553$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements
This page intentionally left blank
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2022
(1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Reporting Entity   The Oregon Intermediate Term Pool (“Pool”) is an intermediate term fixed income
investment vehicle.  Several state agencies and one non-agency entity participate in the Pool, thus it is an
external investment pool as defined in Statement No. 31 of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board,
Accounting and Financial Reporting for Certain Investments and for External Investment Pools.
The Pool is not registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment company.
The State’s investment policies are governed by Oregon Revised Statutes and the Oregon Investment Council
(Council).  The State Treasurer is the investment officer for the Council and is responsible for all funds
entrusted to the Oregon State Treasury (OST).  These funds must be invested, and the investments managed,
as a prudent investor would, exercising reasonable care, skill and caution.  Investments in the Pool are further
governed by guidelines approved by the Council, establishing diversification percentages and specifying the
types and maturities of investments.  The Pool guidelines permit securities lending transactions as well as
investments in repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.  Pool guidelines are discussed in greater detail
in the Investments section of Note 2.
The Pool is authorized under ORS 293.861 and ORS 293.863.  Standards for investment of the pool may be
found in ORS 293.701 to 293.857.  Pursuant to ORS 293.863(5), state agencies have the opportunity to
participate in this investment pool subject to application requiring evidence of statutory authority to invest in
the Pool and subsequent approval by the OST.  The portion of the Pool belonging to external participants is
reported in an investment trust fund in the State’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report.
Basis of Accounting   These statements are prepared using the economic resources measurement focus and
the accrual basis of accounting.  Trade date accounting is observed, which means that purchases and sales of
securities are recorded on the day the trade takes place with a corresponding payable to or receivable from
the broker.  Changes in the fair value of investments are recognized daily.  The fair value of investments is
determined daily and is equal to market price.
Cash and Cash Equivalents   Investments with original maturities of three months or less are considered
cash equivalents and are reported at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.  Cash Equivalents also
include any cash held with the custodian, and amounts invested in the Oregon Short Term Fund (OSTF),
which is an external investment pool open to state agencies and local governments that acts as a demand
deposit account.
Investments   Investments with remaining maturities of less than ninety days are carried at amortized cost,
provided that the fair value of these instruments is not significantly affected by the impairment of the credit
standing of the issuer or by other factors.  Amortized cost approximates fair value.  Investments with longer
maturities are carried at fair value.
Participants’ equity; distributions of interest    The value of each participant’s investment is determined on
a proportional basis to the net market value of the entire portfolio.   Shares of the Pool represent a divisible
interest in the net value of underlying investments, accrued income and expenses. Interest income and capital
gains are not distributed to participants but are reflected in the underlying net position.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2022
(2) Investments
Investments   On June 30, 2022, the Pool reported investments of $307.2 million of which $4.0 million is
classified as Cash and Cash Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position.  The Pool’s guidelines establish
the Pool’s permitted investments and parameters for managing the various types of risk associated with these
investments (see the current portfolio guidelines at ( https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/invested-for-
oregon/pages/oregon-intermediate-term-investments.aspx#OITP.) The different risks will be discussed
below.
Schedule of Investment Characteristics
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type Par Value
Reported
Amount
Weighted Average
Coupon
Weighted Average
Modified Duration
Cash and Cash Equivalents (1)  $  4,050  $   4,050 1.15 0.51
Asset-Backed Securities  59,861  56,600 2.46 1.93
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities  5,780  5,425 2.48 1.95
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities  32  32 2.17 0.44
U.S Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities  22,474  10,437 3.54 7.36
Municipal Debt  475  475 3.62 2.46
Corporate Debt  84,488  81,422 4.24 3.21
U.S. Treasury Debt  151,635  148,763 2.57 4.45
Total 328,795$   307,204$    3.01 3.66
(1) Cash and Cash Equivalents include $4,050 invested in the OSTF.
A. Interest rate and Credit risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment.
OST Investment staff manages this risk by limiting the duration of investments held by the Pool.  The portfolio
guidelines require that the portfolio’s modified duration, a measure of interest rate risk, shall not exceed three
years. The weighted average duration for the Pool at June 30, 2022 was 3.66 years.  The maximum maturity
for any single investment should not be greater than 10.25 years from settlement date, with exceptions for
asset-backed securities, mortgage-backed securities, and commercial mortgage-backed securities. These
securities use weighted average life (WAL) as a proxy for maturity and are limited to a WAL of five years,
or less, at the time of purchase.
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligation.  The
Pool’s guidelines require that all investments meet minimum ratings requirements at the time of purchase.
Minimum required ratings are subject to investment type as dictated by the Pool’s guidelines.
Corporate notes and municipal debt must be rated investment grade or higher at time of purchase.  Foreign
government securities are required to have a minimum credit rating of AA- or Aa3 by at least two Nationally
Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSROs).  Structured securities such as asset-backed and
mortgage-backed securities must be rated AAA at the time of purchase.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2022
Securities downgraded below investment grade can be retained at the Senior Investment Officer’s discretion.
Rating groups are determined using the lowest actual rating from an NRSRO and are shown below:
B. Custodial credit risk
Custodial credit risk for investments is the risk that, in the event of the failure of the counterparty to a
transaction, the pool will not be able to recover the value of an investment or collateral securities in the
possession of an outside party.  The Pool’s guidelines provide that investments are delivered to and held by
a third-party custodian, which holds the Pool’s securities in the State of Oregon’s name.  All trades where
applicable are executed by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securities are deposited in an eligible
financial institution prior to the release of funds.
C. Concentration of credit risk
Concentration of credit risk is the risk of loss attributed to the magnitude of a fund’s investment in a single
issuer.  The Pool guidelines provide that the maximum that may be invested in any one issuer, as a percentage
of the Pool’s total investments is five percent, excluding the OSTF, U.S. Treasuries or U.S. Federal Agencies
or instrumentalities.  The Pool may invest up to 100 percent in those securities.   On June 30, 2022, the Pool
did not hold investments with any one issuer that exceeded these limits.  The schedule below lists issuers
where holdings are greater than 5 percent at the parent level.
Issuer Name Reported Amount Percent of Holding
U.S Treasury  $   148,824 48.4%
Schedule of Parent Leve Issuers - Holdings Greater Than Five Percent
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type
Weighted
Average
Modified
Duration
Reported
Amount AAA AA A BBB BB Not Rated
Asset-Backed Securities 1.93 56,600$    29,716$     6,217 $    12,049 $     2,707$    - $      5,911$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 1.95 5,425   4,207   -    -    -  -   1,218
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (1 ) 0.44 32  -  -   -    -  -  32
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (1 ) 7.36 10,437   -  -   1,549   -  -   8,889
Municipal Debt 2.46 475  475   -  -   -  -  -
Corporate Debt 3.21 81,422   -  -   21,252    59,410  759   -
U.S. Treasury Debt 4.45 148,763  148,763   -   -    -   -   -
External Investment Pool (2) 0.51 4,050   -  -   -    -  -  4,050
Total 307,204$   183,161$     6,217$   34,850 $   62,117$     759$    20,100$
(1 )U.S. federal debt carries an implicit guarantee of the U.S. Government.  For credit quality rules, federal debt is considered to be highest quality, except when rated differently.
(2) T he Oregon Short Term Fund is not rated by the credit ratings agencies.  T he composite credit quality rating of the OST F's holdings was  AA at June 30, 2022.
Interest Rate Risk and Credit Risk
(Dollars in Thousands)
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2022
D. Foreign currency risk
The Pool guidelines prohibit investments that are not U.S. dollar-denominated; therefore, the Pool is not
exposed to this risk.
(3) Securities Lending
The OST has authorized its custodian to act as its agent in the lending of the Pool’s securities pursuant to a
form of loan agreement, in accordance with Pool investment policies.  There have been no significant
violations of the provisions of the securities lending agreement.  The State’s securities lending agent lent
short-term and fixed income securities and received as collateral U.S. dollar-denominated cash.  Borrowers
were required to deliver cash collateral for each loan equal to not less than 102 percent of the market value
of the loaned security.  The State may pledge or sell the collateral securities received only in the event of a
borrower default.  The State has the ability to impose restrictions during the year on the amount of the loans
that the securities lending agent made on its behalf, but did not impose any such limits during the year ended
June 30, 2022.  The State is fully indemnified by its securities lending agent against losses due to borrower
default.  There were no losses during the year from the failure of borrowers to return loaned securities.
The Pool’s lending agent uses a fund to reinvest cash collateral received on behalf of the OITP and other
Oregon state agencies managed by the OST, exclusive of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund.
There were no securities on loan at June 30, 2022.
The State and borrowers maintained the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand.  As
a consequence, the maturities of investments made with cash collateral generally do not match the maturities
of the securities loans.  As of June 30, 2022, the State had no credit risk exposure to borrowers related to
securities on loan.
(4) Management Fees
In accordance with ORS 293.718, the OST may deduct monthly 0.435 basis points of the most recent market
value of assets under management for administration and portfolio management.  For the year ended June 30,
2022 the OST charged the Pool a monthly rate of 0.435 basis points based on assets under management in
the Pool.  Fees are deducted from investment income before distributions to participants.  Fees and other
expenses charged to the Pool totaled $234 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2022.
(5) Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.  Observable inputs are developed
based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity.  Unobservable inputs are
developed based on the best information available about the assumptions market participants would use in
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2022
pricing the asset.  The classification of securities within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the activity
level in the market for the security type and the inputs used to determine their fair value, as follows:
 Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
 Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or
similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all
significant inputs are observable.
 Level 3 – Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are unobservable.
Level 1 Level 2 Lev el 3 Total
Investments:
Asset-Backed Securities -$    56,600$   -$   56,600$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -  5,425 - 5,425
U.S. Agency Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -  32                      - 32
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities -  10,437 - 10,437
Municipal Debt -  475                    - 475
Corporate Debt -  81,422 - 81,422
U.S. Treasury Debt -  148,763  - 148,763
Total -$   303,154 $    -$  303,154 $
Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value as of June 30, 2022
Fair Value Measurements
(Dollars in Thousands)
The Pool’s investments, other than those with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days, are valued
using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent pricing vendors.  The third-party vendors use
a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate relevant observable market data to arrive
at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace would pay for a security under current market conditions.
Investments with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days are carried at amortized cost, which
approximates fair value.  All of the Pool’s investments at June 30, 2022 are considered level 2.
OTHER REPORTS
Shemia Fagan Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters
Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in
Accordance With Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Kate Brown, Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of  the Oregon
Intermediate Term Pool, an external investment pool of the State of Oregon , as of and for the year
ended June 30, 2022, and the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the
Oregon Intermediate Term Pool’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated
September 15, 2022.
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Oregon State
Treasury’s (department) internal control over financial reporting (internal control) as a basis for
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose  of expressing our
opinion on the financial statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the department’s internal control over the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool.
Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s internal control
over the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or
detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented or detected and
corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention
by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this
section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified.
Report on Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Oregon Intermediate Term Fund’s
financial statements are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with
certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which
could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements. However, providing an opinion on
compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express
such an opinion. The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that
are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
department’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in
accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the department’s internal control and
compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
September 15, 2022