Statewide Single Audit
Report
Fiscal Year 2022
July 2023
2023-21
LaVonne Griffin-Valade Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
We have conducted a statewide audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America; the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government
Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States; and the audit requirements
of Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). This report encompasses
the year ended June 30, 2022, and is required for the State to continue receiving federal financial
assistance, which, as shown in this report, totals approximately $21 billion.
As required by the Single Audit Act, we issued a report dated February 27, 2023, on the State of
Oregon’s financial statements. That report was included in the State of Oreg on’s Annual
Comprehensive Financial Report for the year ended June 30, 2022.
This report contains components required by the Single Audit Act to be reported by the auditor:
• Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With
Government Auditing Standards. This component contains our report on the State of Oregon’s
internal control over financial reporting and compliance with provisions of laws, regulations,
contracts and award agreements that affect the financial statements. Part of the schedule of
findings and questioned costs relates to this report.
• Independent Auditor’s Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program; Report on
Internal Control over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
Required by the Uniform Guidance. This component contains our report on the State of
Oregon’s compliance with the requirements applicable to each of its major federal programs as
described in the OMB Compliance Supplement and internal controls over compliance. Part of
the schedule of findings and questioned costs relates to this report. T his component also
contains our report on the State of Oregon’s schedule of expenditures of federal awards for
the year ended June 30, 2022.
• Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs. This schedule lists 17 current year audit findings
regarding internal control related to financial reporting. It also lists 50 current year audit
findings regarding compliance with the requirements of federal programs and related internal
controls.
- ii -
Uniform Guidance requires management to provide a plan of corrective action on the findings
and recommendations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Management’s response and
planned corrective actions are included in this schedule. We did not audit management’s
response, and accordingly, we express no opinion on it.
This report also contains components required by the Single Audit Act to be reported by the State of
Oregon:
• Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards. This schedule is not a required part of the State of
Oregon's financial statements, but is required by Uniform Guidance. The schedule shows the
State of Oregon’s expenditures of federal awards, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 202 2,
excluding discretely presented component units. The notes, which accompany the schedule,
are considered an integral part of the schedule.
• Schedule of Prior Year Findings. This schedule lists the current status of prior year findings that
remained uncorrected at the end of fiscal year 2021.
We concluded that the state’s financial statements are fairly presented in conformance with generally
accepted accounting principles, resulting in an unmodified opinion. We issued a disclaimer of opinion on
the Emergency Solutions Grants Program. We issued an adverse opinion on the Emergency Rental
Assistance Program. We issued qualified opinions on the Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery
Fund, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
(LIHEAP), Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services, and Block Grants for Prevention and
Treatment of Substance Abuse. We issued unmodified opinions on all other major federal programs.
The courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of the State of Oregon during the
course of this audit were commendable and sincerely appreciated.
State of Oregon
- iii -
Table of Contents
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORTS:
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accord ance With
Government Auditing Standards ............................................................................................................... 1
Independent Auditor’s Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program; Report on
Internal Control over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
Required by the Uniform Guidance .......................................................................................................... 4
SCHEDULE OF FINDINGS AND QUESTIONED COSTS:
Summary of Auditor’s Results .................................................................................................................. 11
Financial Statement Findings ................................................................................................................... 13
Federal Awards Findings and Questioned Costs ................................................................................... 31
SCHEDULE OF EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS:
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards ....................................................................................... 94
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards …………………………………………..................124
SCHEDULE OF PRIOR YEAR FINDINGS:
Prior Year Financial Statement Findings ............................................................................................. 126
Prior Year Federal Award Findings and Questioned Costs ............................................................... 133
APPENDIX A: Summaries of Related Audit Reports
Issued by the Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division ................................................................. 161
LaVonne Griffin-Valade Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and
on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed in Accordance With Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the governmental
activities, the business-type activities, the aggregate discretely presented component units, each
major fund, and the aggregate remaining fund information of the State of Oregon as of and for the year
ended June 30, 2022, and the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the
State of Oregon’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated
February 27, 2023.
Our report includes a reference to other auditors who audited the Common School Fund and the Public
Employees Retirement System as described in our report on the State of Oregon’s financial
statements. This report includes our consideration of the results of the other auditors’ testing of
internal control over financial reporting and compliance and other matters that are reported on
separately by those auditors. However, this report, insofar as it relates to the results of the other
auditors, is based solely on the reports of the other auditors.
Our report includes a reference to other auditors who audited the financial statements of the following
discretely presented component units: SAIF Corporation, University of Oregon, Oregon State
University, Portland State University, Western Oregon University, and Oregon Health and Science
University, as described in our report on the State of Oregon’s financial statements. This report does
not include the results of the other auditors’ testing of internal control over financial reporting and
compliance and other matters that are reported on separately by those auditors.
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the State of Ore gon’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial
statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the State of
Oregon’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the State
of Oregon’s internal control.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 2
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the preceding paragraph
and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material weaknesses
or significant deficiencies and therefore, material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that
were not identified. However, as described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned
costs, we identified certain deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses
and significant deficiencies.
A deficiency in internal control  exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or
detect and correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material
misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on
a timely basis. We consider the deficiencies described in the accompanying schedule of findings and
questioned costs as 2022-001, 2022-002, 2022-003, 2022-005, 2022-007, and 2022-010 to be material
weaknesses.
A significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less
severe than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with
governance. We considered the deficiencies described in the accompanying schedule of findings and
questioned costs as items 2022-004, 2022-006, 2022-008, 2022-009, and 2022-011 through 2022-017
to be significant deficiencies.
Report on Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the State of Oregon's financial statements
are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of
laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and
material effect on the financial statements. However, providing an o pinion on compliance with those
provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The
results of our tests and those of the other auditors disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other
matters that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
The State of Oregon’s Response to Findings
Government Auditing Standards requires the auditor to perform limited procedures on the State of
Oregon’s response to the findings identified in our audit and described in the accompanying schedule of
findings and questioned costs. The State of Oregon’s response was not subjected to the other auditing
procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and, accordingly, we express no opinion on
the response.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
entity’s internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 3
accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s internal control and
compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
February 27, 2023
LaVonne Griffin-Valade Secretary of State
Cheryl Myers Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison
Kip Memmott Audits Director
255 Capitol St. NE Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program;
Report on Internal Control over Compliance; and Report on Schedule of
Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by the Uniform Guidance
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
Report on Compliance for Each Major Federal Program
Adverse, Qualified, Unmodified, and Disclaimer of Opinions
We have audited the State of Oregon’s (State) compliance with the types of compliance requirements
identified as subject to audit in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material
effect on each of the State’s major federal programs for the year ended June 30, 202 2; and we were
engaged to audit the State’s compliance with the types of compliance requirements identified as
subject to audit in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on
Assistance Listing Number (ALN) 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grant Program for the year ended
June 30, 2022. The State’s major federal programs are identified in the summary of auditor’s results
section of the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs.
Disclaimer of Opinion on Emergency Solutions Grant Program (ALN 14.231)
We do not express an opinion on the State’s compliance with the compliance requirements identified as
subject to audit in the OMB Compliance Supplement that could have a direct and material effect on the
Emergency Solutions Grant Program. Because of the significance of the matter described in the Basis
for Disclaimer of Opinion on the Emergency Solutions Grant Program section of our report, we have not
been able to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to provide a basis for an audit opinion on
compliance with the types of compliance requirements described in the OMB Compliance Supplement
that could have a direct and material effect on the Emergency Solutions Grant Program.
Adverse Opinion on the Emergency Rental Assistance Program (ALN 21.023)
In our opinion, because of the significance of the matter discussed in the Basis for Adverse, Qualified,
Unmodified Opinions section of our report, the State did not comply in all material respects, with the
compliance requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on the
Emergency Rental Assistance Program for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 5
Qualified Opinions on the Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Fund (ALN 21.027) ,
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (ALN 93.558), Low Income Home Energy Assistance
Program (ALN 93.568), Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services (ALN 93.958), and
Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse (ALN 93.959)
In our opinion, except for the noncompliance described in the Basis for Adverse, Qualified, and
Unmodified Opinions section of our report, the State complied, in all material respects, with the
compliance requirements referred to above that could have a direct and material effect on the
Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Fund, Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, Low
Income Home Energy Assistance Program, Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services, and
Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse programs for the year ended
June 30, 2022.
Unmodified Opinion on Each of the Other Major Federal Programs
In our opinion, the State complied, in all material respects, with the compliance requirements referred
to above that could have a direct and material effect on each of its other m ajor federal programs
identified in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs for the year ended
June 30, 2022.
Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion on the Emergency Solutions Grant Program
As described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs, we were unable to obtain
audit evidence supporting the State’s compliance with the compliance requirements in the table below
applicable to the Emergency Solutions Grant Program. As a result of these matters, we were unable t o
determine whether the State complied with the requirements applicable to the Emergency Solutions
Grant Program.
Assistance
Listing #
Program Name
Finding #
Compliance Requirement
14.231 Emergency Solutions
Grant Program
2022-018
2022-019
2022-020
2022-021
2022-022
2022-023
2022-024
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable
Costs/Cost Principles
Equipment and Real Property Management
Special Tests and Provisions
Matching, Level of Effort, Earmarking
Procurement and Suspension and Debarment
Special Tests and Provisions
Procurement and Suspension and Debarment
Basis for Adverse, Qualified, and Unmodified Opinions
We conducted our audit of compliance in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America (GAAS); the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States (Government Auditing
Standards); and the audit requirements of Title 2 U.S. Code of Federal Regulations Part 200, Uniform
Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform
Guidance). Our responsibilities under those standards and the Uniform Guidance are further described
in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance section of our report.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 6
We are required to be independent of the State and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in
accordance with relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence
we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our adverse, qualified, and
unmodified opinions on compliance for each major federal program. Our audit does not provide a legal
determination of the State’s compliance with the compliance requirements referred to above.
Matters Giving Rise to Adverse Opinion on the Emergency Rental Assistance Program
As described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs, the State did not comply
with the compliance requirements as listed in the table below. Compliance with such requirements is
necessary, in our opinion, for the State to comply with the requirements applicable to that program.
Assistance
Listing #
Program Name
Finding #
Compliance Requirement
21.023 Emergency Rental
Assistance Program
2022-025
2022-026
2022-027
2022-028
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable
Costs/Cost Principles
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Eligibility
Reporting
Reporting
Matters Giving Rise to Qualified Opinions on the Major Federal Programs Listed Below
As described in the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs, the State did not comply
with requirements as listed in the table below. Compliance with such requirements is necessary, in our
opinion, for the State to comply with the requirements applicable to those programs.
Assistance
Listing # Program Name Finding # Compliance Requirement
21.027 Coronavirus State and Local
Fiscal Recovery Fund
2022-031 Subrecipient Monitoring
93.558
Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families
2022-036
2022-037
2022-038
Reporting
Special Tests and Provisions
Special Tests and Provisions
93.568
Low Income Home Energy
Assistance
2022-032
2022-033
Subrecipient Monitoring
Reporting
93.958 Block Grants for Community
Mental Health Services
2022-041
2022-042
2022-043
Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Subrecipient Monitoring
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and
Treatment of Substance Abuse
2022-041
2022-043
Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Subrecipient Monitoring
Other Matter – Federal Expenditures Not Included in the Compliance Audit
The State’s basic financial statements include the operations of the component units in the table
below, which expended $1.7 billion in federal awards which is not included in the State’s schedule of
expenditures of federal awards during the year ended June 30, 2022. Our compliance audit does not
include the operations of the below component units because they engaged other audi tors to perform
an audit of compliance.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 7
Component Unit   Federal Expenditures
University of Oregon $     342,545,157
Oregon State University 493,483,904
Portland State University 208,735,922
Oregon Health & Science University 559,403,208
Western Oregon University 39,849,141
Oregon Institute of Technology 33,325,557
Southern Oregon University 36,006,820
Eastern Oregon University 24,169,505
Total $1,737,519,214
Responsibilities of Management for Compliance
Management is responsible for compliance with the requirements referred to above and for the design,
implementation, and maintenance of effective internal control over compliance with the requirements
of laws, statutes, regulations, rules, and provisions of contracts or grant agreements applicable to the
State’s federal programs.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance for the Emergency Solutions Grant Program
Our responsibility is to conduct an audit of compliance in accordance with GAAS, Government Auditing
Standards, and the Uniform Guidance and to issue an auditor’s report. However, because of the matter
described in the Basis for Disclaimer of Opinion on the Emergency Solutions Grant Program sectio n of
our report, we were not able to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to provide a basis for an
audit opinion on compliance.
We are required to be independent of the State and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in
accordance with the relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance for all other Major Federal Programs
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether material noncompliance with the
compliance requirements referred to above occurred, whether due to fraud or error, and express an
opinion on the State’s compliance based on our audit. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance
but is not absolute assurance and therefore is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance
with GAAS, Government Auditing Standards, and the Uniform Guidance will always detect material
noncompliance when it exists. The risk of not detecting material noncompliance resulting from fraud is
higher than for that resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Noncompliance with the compliance
requirements referred to above is considered material if there is a substantial likel ihood that,
individually or in the aggregate, it would influence the judgment made by a reasonable user of the
report on compliance on the State’s compliance with the requirements of each major federal program
as a whole.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 8
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS, Government Auditing Standards, and the Uniform
Guidance, we
• exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• identify and assess the risks of material noncompliance, whether due to fraud or error, and
design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures include
examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the State’s compliance with the compliance
requirements referred to above and performing such other procedures as we consi dered
necessary in the circumstances.
• obtain an understanding of the State’s internal control over compliance relevant to the
audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, and to
test and report on internal control over compliance in accordance with the Uniform
Guidance, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
State’s internal control over compliance. Accordingly, no such opinion is expressed.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters,
the planned scope and timing of the audit and any significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in
internal control over compliance that we identified during the audit.
Other Matters
The results of our auditing procedures disclosed other instances of noncompliance which are required
to be reported in accordance with the Uniform Guidance and are described in the accompanying
schedule of findings and questioned costs as items 2022-034, 2022-035, 2022-040, 2022-045,
2022-046, 2022-049, 2022-051 through 2022-056, 2022-058 through 2022-061, 2022-063, and
2022-065 through 2022-067. Our opinion on each major federal program is not modified with respect
to these matters.
Government Auditing Standards requires the auditor to perform limited procedures on the State’s
response to the noncompliance findings identified in our compliance audit described in the
accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs. The State’s response was not subjected to
the other auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and, accordingly, we express no
opinion on the response.
Uniform Guidance requires auditing procedures to follow up on prior year findings , including programs
that are not audited as major programs. Findings 2022-047 and 2022-048, as described in the
accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs, identified noncompliance or internal control
deficiencies for the Opioid STR program (ALN 93.788). We express no opinion on this program.
Report on Internal Control over Compliance
Our consideration of internal control over compliance was for the limited purpose described in the
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Compliance section above and was not designed to identify
all deficiencies in internal control over compliance that might be material weaknesses or significant
deficiencies and therefore, material weaknesses or significant deficiencies may exist that were not
identified. However, as discussed below, we did identify certain deficiencies in internal control over
compliance that we consider to be material weaknesses and significant deficiencies.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 9
A deficiency in internal control over compliance exists when the design or operation of a control over
compliance does not allow management or employees, in the normal course of performing their
assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct, noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program on a timely basis. A material weakness in internal control over
compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over compliance, such
that there is a reasonable possibility that material noncompliance with a type of compliance
requirement of a federal program will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis.
We consider the deficiencies in internal control over compliance described in the accompanying
schedule of findings and questioned costs as items 2022-018 through 2022-020, 2022-025 through
2022-033, 2022-035 through 2022-039, 2022-041 through 2022-044, and 2022-065 to be material
weaknesses.
A significant deficiency in internal control over compliance is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal control over compliance with a type of compliance requirement of a federal
program that is less severe than a material weakness in internal control over compliance, yet important
enough to merit attention by those charged with governance. We consider the deficiencies in internal
control over compliance described in the accompanying schedule of fin dings and questioned costs as
items 2022-021 through 2022-024, 2022-034, 2022-040, 2022-045 through 2022-055, 2022-057
through 2022-064, and 2022-066 through 2022-067 to be significant deficiencies.
Our audit of the State’s major programs (excluding the Emergency Solutions Grant program) was not
designed for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control over
compliance. Accordingly, no such opinion is expressed.
Government Auditing Standards requires the auditor to perform limited procedures on the State’s
response to the internal control over compliance findings identified in our compliance audit described in
the accompanying schedule of findings and questioned costs. The State’s response was not subjected
to the other auditing procedures applied in the audit of compliance and, accordingly, we express no
opinion on the response.
The purpose of this report on internal control over compliance is solely to describe the scope of our
testing of internal control over compliance and the results of that testing based on the requirements of
the Uniform Guidance. Accordingly, this report is not suitable for any other purpose.
Report on Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards Required by the Uniform
Guidance
We have audited the financial statements of the governmental activities, the business type activities,
the aggregate discretely presented component units, each major fund, and the aggregate remaining
fund information of the State as of and for the year ended June 30, 2022, and the related notes to the
financial statements, which collectively comprise the State’s basic financial statements. We issued our
report thereon dated February 27, 2023, which contained unmodified opinions on those financial
statements. Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial statements
that collectively comprise the basic financial statements. The accompanying schedule of expenditures
of federal awards is presented for purposes of additional analysis as required by the Uniform Guidance
and is not a required part of the basic financial statements. Such information is the responsibility of
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 10
management and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying accounting and other records
used to prepare the basic financial statements. The information has been subjected to the auditing
procedures applied in the audit of the financial statements and certain additional procedures, including
comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying accounting and other records
used to prepare the basic financial statements or to the basic financial statements themselves, and
other additional procedures in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United
States of America. In our opinion, the schedule of expenditures of federal awards is fairly stated in all
material respects in relation to the basic financial statements as a whole.
State of Oregon
July 20, 2023, except for our report on the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards, for which the
date is February 27, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 11
State of Oregon
Schedule of Findings and Questioned Costs
For the Year ended June 30, 2022
Section I — Summary of Auditor’s Results
Financial Statements
Type of auditor’s report issued: Unmodified
Internal control over financial reporting:
Material weaknesses identified?  yes  no
Significant deficiencies identified that are
not considered to be material weaknesses?
yes  none reported
Noncompliance material to financial statements
noted?
yes  no
Federal Awards
Internal control over major programs:
Material weaknesses identified?  yes  no
Significant deficiencies identified that are
not considered to be material weaknesses?
yes  none reported
Type of auditor’s report issued on compliance for
major programs
Disclaimer:
Emergency Solutions Grant Program
Adverse:
Emergency Rental Assistance Program
Qualified:
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program
Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds
Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
Block Grants for Treatment and Prevention of
Substance Abuse
Unmodified:
All Other Major Programs
Any audit findings disclosed that are required to be
reported in accordance with 2 CFR 200.516(a)?
yes  no
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 12
Identification of Major Programs
Assistance
Listing # Name of Federal Program or Cluster
10.542 Pandemic EBT Food Benefits
14.231 Emergency Solutions Grant Program
21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance
21.027 State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds
84.425 Education Stabilization Fund
93.268 Immunization Cooperative
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
93.659 Adoption Assistance
93.667 Social Services Block Grant
93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse
Cluster WIA/WIOA Cluster
Cluster Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
Cluster Medicaid Cluster
Cluster Disability Insurance/SSI Cluster
Dollar threshold used to distinguish between type A and type B programs:  $31,233,606
Auditee qualified as low-risk auditee?  yes  no
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 13
Section II – Financial Statement Findings
Management Responses are submitted by agency management and are not subjected to auditing
procedures.
2022-001 Department of Human Services
Ensure federal program funding is recorded to the correct program
Material Weakness
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.400(a)-(d)
State agencies are required to administer federal funds in a manner consistent with the terms and
conditions of the Federal award.
During fiscal year 2022, the Department of Human Services issued benefits under the new
Pandemic EBT (P-EBT) program. The program used the same Oregon Eligibility system as the
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), which interfaces the program transactions to the
state’s accounting system. Initial guidance from the federal government did not provide a separate
assistance listing number for P-EBT, so the department did not set up separate coding in the system
when implementing the P-EBT program to allow program expenditures to be recorded separately from
the SNAP program expenditures.
Despite assurances from department management that the financial records would be corrected by the
end of fiscal year 2022, the appropriate adjustments to separate the two programs were not made and
had been only partially completed as of January 2023. This resulted in an adjustment in  January to
move approximately $568.4 million in federal expenditures and revenues from SNAP to P -EBT.
We recommend the agency ensure any new federal programs have the correct coding applied to
ensure accurate reporting of federal expenditure by each federal program.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Office of Financial Services has corrected the assistance number for federal reporting for P-EBT.
We will review internal procedures to ensure validation steps are included and incor porated in the
process for establishing structure to support federal reporting requirements .
Anticipated Completion Date:  May 31, 2023
2022-002 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve internal controls over lease entries
Material Weakness
Criteria: Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement 87; Oregon Accounting Manual, Policy
15.60.30
During fiscal year 2022, the State of Oregon implemented GASB pronouncement 87, which r elates to
the accounting for leases. As a lessee, state agencies are required to capitalize leases at the present
value of future payments to be made and to record a liability for the present value of future lease
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 14
payments to be made. As a lessor, state agencies are required to recognize a receivable and a deferred
inflow of resources for the present value of payments to be received.
To implement the new pronouncement, accounting and procurement staff reviewed thousands of
contracts to determine if they met the applicable reporting requirements. The increased workload was
in addition to the employees’ existing workloads. To assist in the calculations, management purchased
new software for tracking the leases and calculating the entries for fiscal year 2022 a s well as future
fiscal years. However, the software was not acquired until May of 2022 and accounting staff did not
have an opportunity to complete inputting the applicable data and verifying accuracy before the
necessary entries were required.
During our review of leases, we selected a sample of 40 items where the departments recorded lessee
entries. We identified the following errors in our review:
• 23 items were not recorded for the appropriate leased asset amount. Leased assets were
undervalued by $3.8 million (known error)
• 12 items were not recorded for the appropriate lease obligation amount. Lease obligations
were undervalued by $4.1 million (known error)
• 33 items were not recorded for the appropriate accumulated amortization amount.
Accumulated amortization for leased assets was undervalued by approximately $539
thousand (known error).
As part of the lessee entries, expenditures and other financing sources should be reported in the period
the lease is initially recognized. The Department of Human Services did not report expenditures and
offsetting other financing sources in any of the governmental funds which ultimately resulted in
overstating the expenditures and other financing sources by over $186.1 million in t he General Fund
and understating the Health and Social Services fund by the same amount The Oregon Health Authority
also did not report expenditures and offsetting other financing sources in any of the governmental
funds, which ultimately resulted in an overstatement of the expenditures and other financing sources
of $12.6 million in the General Fund, understatement of over $162 thousand in the Consumer
Protection Fund, and an understatement of $12.4 million in the Health and Social Services Fund.
We also identified one lease entered into by the Department of Human Services where the agency is
the lessor. The Department of Human Services did not make the entries required by GASB
pronouncement 87 to record the receivable and the deferred inflow of resources f or the present value
of payments to be received, resulting in an understatement of approximately $1.4 million.
We recommend management strengthen internal controls to ensure leased asset, lease liability, and
accumulated amortization is appropriately valued and ensure all leases meeting the criteria of GASB 87
are recorded. We also recommend management strengthen internal controls to ensure expenditures
and offsetting other financing sources related to leases are recorded to the appropriate governmental
funds.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Office of Financial Services (OFS) has reviewed and corrected all initial lease entries within the
GASB87 software as per the audit findings. OFS has also created a new D23 fund per guidance  to
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 15
record entries in the appropriate financing source. OFS will create detailed GASB87 procedures to
follow to ensure accurate reporting in the future years.
Anticipated Completion Date:  May 31, 2023
2022-003 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Year-end financial entries require additional review to ensure conformity with accounting
standards
Material Weakness
Criteria: Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement 34; GASB Statement 99
For most of the year, the state’s accounting system operates on a cash basis of reporting. At fiscal
year-end, state agencies are required to update the accounting records to be in conformity with either
the modified accrual or full accrual basis of accounting. In some cases, state agencies must estimate
certain transactions expected to occur within the three months following fiscal year -end when they are
applicable to the prior fiscal year. In other cases, the entries are required for events already known to
have occurred.
During the audit, we reviewed the year-end entries and noted multiple errors requiring adjustment to
the financial statements for items known to have occurred. We found:
• An entry incorrectly recorded a cash transaction that had been previously recorded
resulting in a $214.2 million overstatement.
• An entry incorrectly created $296.7 million of American Rescue Plan (ARPA) expenditures
based on fiscal year 2022 grant balances. Unlike most federal programs, ARPA was advance
funded by the federal government and did not require the state spend the funds before
receiving them from the federal government. Due to a misunderstanding of the ARPA
funding, the entry was made to record expenditures that had not yet occurred . A user
error caused this grant to be set up as a reimbursable grant rather than an advance funded
grant.
• For one federal program, the year-end entries incorrectly removed federal revenues from
the accounting records. The department contacted the Statewide Accounting and
Reporting Services (SARS) unit to correct the misstatement for approximately $94.7 million
but it was incomplete and an additional adjustment of $6.8 million was necessary  to correct
the issue.
• Near the end of fiscal year 2022, the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
issued statement 99, with implementation required the same year, changing the
expenditure recognition requirements for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP). GASB 99 requires expenditures be recognized when client benefits are issued,
rather than when benefits are spent. The department’s year-end entry did not properly
account for the change in reporting, resulting in an overstatement of approximately $8 0.7
million to revenues and expenditures.
• Most federal programs operate using a combination of federal funds and state funds. In
some cases, the state funds are spent from the General Fund, and in other cases,
expenditures will be paid with specific revenue streams. For cash flow purposes, the
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 16
departments will spend money out of the General Fund if the other revenue streams are
not available when the expenditure is made. When the funds become available, the
departments will “refinance” the transactions in the accounting system to correctly report
which funds ultimately paid the expense. As part of the year-end process, the departments
forecast the necessary year-end entries to comply with accounting standards. The
departments have multiple financial sub-systems and each year staff obtain estimates of
potential year-end adjustments from these systems. The accounting staff was informed
from another Financial Services unit that some of the refinancing adjustments for system
interfaces would be made in a timeline to be reported as fiscal year 2022 transa ctions, and
the accounting staff correctly recorded the entries. However, the refinancing transactions
did not occur on the timeline as expected, and the financial statements required
adjustments totaling $47.4 million for one of these systems.
We recommend management ensure accounting entries are complete, accurate, and made in
accordance with accounting standards. Additionally, management should develop and implement a
process to modify year-end entries if expected adjustments do not occur within expected timeframes.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Office of Financial Services Statewide Financial Reporting (SFR) Unit will engage more closely with
staff providing year-end system transaction details to ensure all elements of the data are accounted
for are still anticipated to be completed by September 30. Specific to this finding, SFR has also adjusted
the year end process for the cash accrual to avoid missing transactions affecting cash. Additionally,
written processes are being updated with greater details.
Anticipated Completion Date:  September 30, 2023
2022-004 Department of Administrative Services
Ensure access control policies and procedures are consistently applied
Significant Deficiency
The Department of Administrative Services has established controls over access to the Statewide
Financial Management Application (SFMA) and Oregon State Payroll Application (OSPA) information
systems which are designed to restrict access to only authorized users based on user job descriptions
and duties. Access requests are reviewed by the Statewide Accounting and Reporting Services (SARS)
to ensure appropriate segregation of duties and only authorized users are granted system access. In
addition, SARS conducts semi-annual reviews to ensure Agency Security Officer (ASO) authority is
updated and user access is regularly reviewed by ASOs to ensure user access is appro priate, and any
unauthorized users are revoked timely.
During the course of our audit, we noted the following six instances in which OSPA and SFMA system
controls were not operating as designed:
• We noted one instance in which SARS processed duplicate OSPA system access requests
for the same user which had been submitted by two different agency ASOs. Additionally,
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 17
this user was granted inappropriate access to a shared agency group for a period of four
months;
• On two occasions, SARS processed system access requests for OSPA from ASOs who were
not authorized approvers;
• On another occasion, SARS processed an OSPA access request form which did not include
all required elements;
• One instance of access granted with incomplete documentation for an SFMA access
request; and,
• One instance during the spring semi-annual review in which SARS did not process all
updates to the list of authorized ASOs requested by an agency’s Chief Financial Officer .
If established access controls are not adequately implemented, inappropriate or unauthorized system
access could occur, resulting in increased risk of unauthorized transactions and/or material
misstatements.
We recommend department management ensure all established system access internal control policies
and procedures are followed when granting new access and control processes are monitored to ensure
only authorized users can access and make changes to the state’s financial and payroll system data.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
We have hired a new staff member to administer security for the statewide financial systems. As part
of that new employee’s onboarding, we will emphasize adherence to existing system security policies
and procedures, ensure proper training of the new employee occurs, and routinely perform monitoring
to ensure only properly authorized access is granted.
Anticipated Completion Date:  July 1, 2022
2022-005 Oregon Business Development Department
Strengthen accounting procedures
Material Weakness
Criteria: OAM 10.15.00.103
State accounting policy requires management to develop procedures to ensure that transactions are
correctly recorded in the state’s accounting system for financial reporting purposes. State agencies are
also expected to follow guidance provided by the Department of Administrative Services Statewide
Accounting and Reporting Services (SARS) when implementing new accounting standards. SARS also
issues a guide to year-end financial reporting agencies should follow.
During our financial audit work at the department, we identified the following errors in the accoun ting
records:
• The department did not record its $23 million April 2022 lottery bond principal and interest
payment in the accounting system.
• The department did not record $5.4 million in amortization of bond premium as part of
year-end reporting procedures.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 18
• The department did not make a $34 million year-end entry to reclassify bonds payable to
be paid in the next year as current, resulting in a classification misstatement of $34 million .
• The department did not make a year-end entry to reclassify loan principal expected to be
received in the next year as current loans receivable, resulting in a classification
misstatement of over $15.8 million.
• The department received $325 million in American Rescue Plan Act federal funds as
directed by legislation. As part of year-end closing, the department should have recognized
a liability for any federal funds received but not spent by June 30, 2022. The department
did not record the $290 million liability for unearned revenue.
• The department did not correctly follow standards or guidance to implement a new
accounting standard for leases. Prior accounting management incorrectly determined none
of its agreements met the definition of a lease. Based on our review, the department re -
examined their agreements and determined that some would meet the definition of a lease
and should have been recorded. This resulted in approximately $1.7 million of leased assets
and lease liability not being recorded.
Prior to the close of the fiscal year, the department experienced significant turnover in its accounting
staff, including the accounting manager. This turnover resulted in the loss of some knowledge related
to the agency and its year-end closing financial reporting process and entries made. In addition, the
department did not have any written policies and procedures to support the year-end closing process.
We recommend management develop and implement procedures to identify and ensure all year end
closing entries are recorded in the accounting records and develop written po licies and procedures for
financial reporting. Additionally, we recommend management develop a process to ensure leases are
properly captured and recorded.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Business Development Department (Business Oregon) will have its Senior Accountants attend
multiple trainings offered by the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) to prepare for fiscal year
end 2023. Currently, two Senior Accountants are spending an hour a week reviewing past trainings
offered by DAS which will be completed by June 2023, including Year -End Close Training, GASB 87
Leases Training, and Long-term Debt Training. The Senior Accountants and the Accounting Manager
will attend the 2023 Year-End Train ng which will be held in June 2023.
In addition to the training, the Accounting Manager and Senior Accountants will develop procedures,
document workpapers, and review the Guide to Year-End close during fiscal months 12 and 13 to
ensure that all necessary entries have been made for FY2023.
Business Oregon will take steps to ensure leases are properly captured and recorded per GASB 87. In
December 2021, Business Oregon reviewed all current leases and determined six leases qualified under
GASB 87. Amortization schedules were created for all six leases and documentation was created
around why these leases qualified under GASB 87. For any future leases that might be  implemented,
the Accounting Manager and Senior Accountants will use the Lease Data Matrix to  evaluate if the lease
qualifies under GASB 87 and will use TValue to create amortization schedules for the qualifying leases.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 19
Finally, Business Oregon will review the GASB 87 Lease training by DAS to determine necessary entries
and will be reviewing the Guide to Year-End Close to ensure year-end lease entries are properly
recorded.
2022-006 Department of Justice
Improve internal controls over lease entries
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: Government Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 87; Oregon Accounting Manual, poli cy
15.60.30
During fiscal year 2022, the State of Oregon implemented a new accounting standard related to leases.
In accordance with state policy and other guidance provided to agencies, the department was
responsible to identify all applicable leases and ensure proper accounting and reporting of the leases.
We reviewed the department’s support for 15 leases. Within this review we identified the following
errors:
• The department used the incorrect discount rate for valuing the future payments for the 15
leases.
• The department incorrectly included the monthly operating expenses and property taxes in
the capitalization of the leased asset.
• For one lease, the department did not have the correct number of payments based on the
lease termination date in the contract amendment.
In aggregate, for leased buildings, this resulted in an overstatement of the leased buildings and the
related lease liability of about $17 million. These errors occurred as the department did not correctly
implement the accounting standard using the training and resources provided to all state agencies.
We recommend department management implement controls over accounting for capital leases to
ensure capital leases and associated accounts are properly valued in the financial records.  The
department should review its leases to identify and correct the various errors a nd make correcting
entries in the accounting system.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
DOJ will review all leases and prepare correcting entries that remedy and address the following:
• Correct discount rate;
• Exclusion of monthly operating expenses and property taxes from lease valuation, and;
• Review and count of monthly payments for lease duration.
Anticipated Completion Date:  May 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 20
2022-007 Department of Revenue
Consider incorporating actuals in tax accrual calculations and ensure the calculations and
reasoning are documented in a methodology
Material Weakness
Criteria: GASB Codification Section N50.113
As part of the state’s financial reporting process, state agencies are responsible for making year-end
entries in the accounting system to facilitate financial reporting. The Department of Revenue
(department) uses an accrual process designed to identify outstanding tax debt net of an allowance for
uncollectible taxes as of June 30, and determine how much of the outstanding debt should be classified
as current or noncurrent using historical data.
During the fiscal year, the department made changes to some of its tax accrual methodology and relied
on data provided by its research department. However, the changes and the reasoning behind the
changes were not formally documented as part of their written methodology.  We identified the
following issues with the department’s year-end accrual:
• The initial calculation of uncollectible taxes based on the department’s updated
methodology resulted in a noticeably lower estimate reported compared to the prior year.
Upon inquiry, the department initially struggled to explain the reason for the reduction.
Eventually, the department provided an explanation with revised uncollectible data and
calculations. Based on the difference between the initial and revised uncollectible data, the
reported allowance for uncollectible taxes was understated by approximately $223 million.
• The accrual process begins with known taxes receivables at June 30 and taxes collected in
the month after June 30. The department reduces the total of the taxes collected in the
month after June 30 by a historical percentage to estimate the portion related to taxes
receivables known at June 30. However, the department could use a report from its system
of taxes collected related to known receivables at June 30 instead of this estimate .
Auditors obtained this report from the system to compare to the department’s estimate
and determined the department’s estimate was overstated by approximate ly $7.7 million.
• For taxes receivable known at June 30, the department estimates the portion of current
taxes expected to be collected within 90 days after June 30 using historical pe rcentages
and does not consider actual collections data available to them. When compared to actual
receipts collected, the department overstated current taxes receivable by approximately
$44 million, resulting in adjustments to the personal income tax revenue account. Part of
the difference between the department’s estimate and actual receipts is a result of relying
on historical percentages that include unusual changes due to the Covid pandemic.
We recommend department management consider including actual data from the system to the
extent possible instead of solely relying on prior year activity that can be impacted when unusual
events occur. In addition, the department should ensure its taxes receivable methodology and
reasoning is fully documented so can be duplicated and explained.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 21
1st bullet point:  The Oregon Department of Revenue updated its uncollectible tax calculations
methodology in late 2021. DOR Financial Services reverted to pre-2021 methodology, when calculating
year-end entries for fiscal year 2022, and this created the difference. The depa rtment has documented
its new uncollectible methodology, written a process for data calculations and sharing between
Collections, Finance, and Research. Finance has re-confirmed that its own procedures use the new
methodology.
2nd bullet point: Issue will be resolved June 30, 2023 year-end close. Finance is currently updating its
processes and work papers to pull actuals, instead of its old methodology of historical percentages.
3rd bullet point: To pull actuals and use no estimation, the department would need to wait until October
to post accruals and receivable entries. The department currently does this for Corporate Activity Tax.
However, because these programs feed the General Fund it is very unlikely the department can wait
until October. Therefore, the department will pull as much data as it can, and work on a new
methodology to estimate the remaining months. Because estimations are still used, there will likely be
adjustments every year. The issue will be resolved June 30,2023 year-end close. Finance is currently
updating its processes and documentation to pull as many months of actual receipts as it can and will
work with its Research Section to develop a new methodology to estimate the remaining months in the
fiscal year.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-008 Oregon Military Department
Ensure construction in progress tracking reconciles to accounting records
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 15.60.10, Policy 101 & Procedure 111
The department provided a report of construction in progress which documented over 40 projects in
progress. However, the department had not received all needed updates from project managers
regarding completed projects which would indicate any projects that are ready for capitalization. This
resulted in a $14 million overstatement of construction in progress.  It is important for the accounting
department to have an updated list of the projects and costs and communicate with project managers
to know when the cost should be capitalized and depreciated.
We recommend the department finish updating the construction in progress tracking records and
ensure it reconciles to the accounting records.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Financial Administration Division will finalize updating tracking documents related to Construction
in Progress. The Financial Administration Division will also implement, in concert with the Construction
Branch of the Installations Division, a process where Project Managers provide updates to the Debt
Management Accountant on a recurring basis throughout the fiscal year for all ongoing projects. These
updates will drive determinations, made jointly by the Project Manager and the Debt Management
Accountant, as to whether projects have reached substantial completion and are ready for
Capitalization, or whether project cost should continue to reside within Construction in Progress.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 22
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-009 Oregon State Police
Improve controls over accounting of leases
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: Government Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 87; Oregon Accounting Manual, policy
15.60.30
During fiscal year 2022, the State of Oregon implemented a new accounting standard related to leases.
In accordance with state policy and other guidance provided to agencies, the department was
responsible to identify all applicable leases and ensure proper accounting and reporting of the leas es.
We reviewed the department’s support for 13 leases. Within this review we identified the following
errors:
• For 6 leases, the lease term exceeded 15-years but the department used the 10-year
Oregon Bond index rate instead of the 20-year Oregon Bond index rate
• For 4 leases, the lease payment amounts used did not agree to the lease contract and or
contract addendums.
In aggregate, this resulted in an overstatement of the leased buildings and the related lease liability of
about $9.3 million. Various training and resources were provided to all state agencies around
implementing the new standard. However, the department made technical errors during its
implementation.
We recommend department management implement controls over accounting for capital leases to
ensure capital leases and associated accounts are properly valued in the financial records. Department
should also review its leases to identify and correct the various errors and make correcting entries in
the accounting system.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OSP believes that while this is a new requirement and we have over sixty leases to account for, we are
responsible for identifying applicable leases and accurately valuating them on the financial statements.
OSP Financial Services did in fact correctly set up the accounting structure needed to implement the
new standard, correctly determined all leases that applied, and because we have many leases that have
other complicating factors involved, such as options to extend, many  funding sources, prorating mid-
year leases, etc. this process was very complicated and time consuming.
OSP agrees that there were errors made regarding the correct bond index rate used while calculating
the lease amortization, a 10-year bond index rate was used instead of a 20-year bond index rate
resulting in an overstatement of the liability. There were also a few leases that the total contract
amount did not match the amount that had been amortized. These errors have been corrected and
post close adjustments completed.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 23
OSP is proposing the following change to current process to ensure errors such as this do not
occur in the future and the GASB issued Statement No. 87, Leases is accurately managed and
reported.
We are developing and implementing an internal review process of the lease and technical details to
ensure all leases we are including meet the requirements of the standard. This process will start with
routine review of every contract, agreement, and lease while organizing them into a sustainable system
to ensure we are accurately reporting the amount of lease liability in each fiscal year.
This process involves first reviewing our work on an internal basis, review of schedules conducted in a
comprehensive review of each step of the process from identifying new lease agreements initiated,
when existing leases are modified, lease terms change, down to addressing the journal entries and
ensuring their accuracy and compliance with GASB — 87. The process also involves another review
process externally to the preparation, to ensure that all areas have been addressed properly, nothing
was missed, or additional guidance that may be helpful not originally considered.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 1, 2023
2022-010 Oregon Department of Emergency Management
Improve controls over federal requests for reimbursement
Material Weakness
Criteria: 2 CFR § 200.305; OAM 15.42.00
Oregon Department of Emergency Management (department) became a separate agency effective
July 1, 2022 but prior was part of the Oregon Military Department (OMD). We audited federal revenue
recorded at OMD, which included revenue related to the department. During our audit, the department
struggled to determine which expenditures supported the federal request for reimbursement (RFR) as
it was unclear from federal revenue documentation. In addition, the department was unable to locate
certain expenditure documentation supporting the RFRs for 5 of 18 sample items. Agency management
provided the following reasons which led to inadequate support documentation:
• No formal policy had been created to document the expenditures that are being
reimbursed on federal RFR’s.
• Key personnel who had the knowledge necessary to create the expense reports that tied
to the RFR’s, left the agency. Due to this, the department was unable to produce
documentation that showed what expenditures tied to each RFR.
• Expenditure documentation was not consistently scanned and saved on shared drives
(some documentation was still in hardcopy form).
• The department is a recent agency and was in the process of moving to a new office space.
As such some hard copies for the expenditures were unable to be located.
We recommend department management create and implement procedures for tying the request for
reimbursement (RFR) to the expenditure being reimbursed. Additionally, the department should create
and implement procedures for archiving financial documents (RFR and expenditures ).
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 24
Prior to July 2022, the Oregon Department of Emergency Management (ODEM) was an office within the
Oregon Military Department (OMD). Past SOS audits have included recommendations for OMD to
strengthen controls to ensure financial reports are accurate and adequately supported by accounting
records. ODEM acknowledges that as a recent new agency there is a need to develop policies,
procedures or protocols relating to tying records to requests for financial reimbursement s and
archiving financial documents.
ODEM will create and implement policies relating to processing RFRs, including how to ensure all
documentation is properly tied to each reimbursement. ODEM will have all paper documents scanned
and ensure proper electronic filing of documents and create standards relating to naming conventions
and file structure. ODEM will also create and implement archiving policies for its financial records. ODEM
is currently working with larger state agencies to gather examples of fin ancial policies. The Finance
Division and Mitigation Section have already actively begun clean-up of electronic files, ensuring
consistency and clarity among current network drives, folders and file structures. ODEM's internal
auditor is performing an audit of the grant accounting process with an anticipated end date of May
2023.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
2022-011 Oregon Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to prepare financial statements that are compliant with
GAAP require improvement
Significant Deficiency
During the fiscal year 2022 audit of the Veterans’ Loan Program’s financial statements, auditors
noted concerns regarding the department’s ability to prepare the program’s financial statements
and notes to financial statements in compliance with generally accepted accounting principles,
primarily because the department experienced significant turnover of accounting staff over th e
past year, including the accountant responsible for the preparation of the financial statements .
In our review of the initial and subsequent drafts of the financial statements and note disclosures we
noted several errors:
• Within Management’s Discussion and Analysis, we found sections of missing information,
information that was not updated for the current year, incorrectly presented comparative
financial information and information that did not reconcile to the basic financial
statements.
• In the Notes to the Financial Statements, dates were not updated for the current fiscal
year, amounts did not tie back to the basic financial statements or accounting records, and
incorrect rates or amounts were reported.
• The Statement of Net Position and the Statement of Cash Flows were missing key line
items or lacked adequate support, including missing required components in the Net
Position section of the Statement of Net Position, and omission of Securities Lending
Revenue and Expense line items in the Statement of Cash Flows.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 25
We recommend department management dedicate resources to training staff responsible for the
preparation of the financial statements and notes to the financial statements. We also recommend
department management implement financial statement preparation procedures.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Within the past year, ODVA has experienced turnover in the Financial Services Division Director
(Chief Financial Officer) and Controller positions as well as four out of the remaining seven
accounting positions in the finance division. That turnover as well as the lack of staff experience and
documentation of internal procedures significantly contributed to the errors and omissions.
Corrective Action:
1. Management will require additional training for staff responsible for the preparation of the
financial statements and notes to the financial statements to ensure completeness and
accuracy in those documents.
2. Management will document financial statement preparation procedures to aid Financial
Services Division staff and provide continuity during periods of staff turnover.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-012 Oregon Department of Corrections
Ensure revenues are properly recorded
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 15.35.00; Guide to Year-End Closing
State legislation required the Department of Administrative Services to transfer over $969 million
dollars in federal funds to the department from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
Coronavirus Relief Fund and from the American Rescue Plan Act Coronavirus State Fiscal Recovery
Fund. These federal funds were received in advance, but the department did not expend all the funds
by June 30, 2022. State policy and guidance requires the department to recognize a liability for any
federal funds received in advance but not spent by year end. Due to an oversight, the department
overlooked recording this year-end financial reporting entry to reduce the federal revenue and
recognize a liability resulting in a $492 million misstatement.
We recommend department management to ensure year end closing guidance is followed in future
years.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
We agree with the auditor’s finding that we did not record a liability for unspent American Rescue Plan
Act (ARPA) Coronavirus State Fiscal Recovery Fund revenue at June 30, 2022. In past biennia, DOC has
primarily been funded by General Fund dollars, thus having a large part of our budget replaced with
federal funds was both new and more complex. The funds were initially sent to DOC as separate
transfers rather than as revenue, which contributed to the error.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 26
We have added a step to our annual year-end checklist that requires review of federal and other
advanced grants to determine whether any funds remain unspent at the end of the fiscal year and take
action to record a liability for unearned revenue, if necessary. We have also added a step to our SEFA
disclosure work program that verifies that any advance grants listed on the SEFA query are evaluated
for unspent funds and a liability for unearned revenue recorded, if applicable.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-013 Department of Consumer and Business Services
Improve reconciliation controls over security deposits
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 10.00.00.PO.102
Department management is responsible for ensuring internal controls provide reasonable assurance
that security deposits are accurately and completely reported. The Division of Financial Regulation
(DFR) is responsible for regulating insurance companies and ensuring insurance companies deposit
securities to be held for the faithful performance of their obligations. The department contracts with a
custodian to be the depository for these securities, and insurers can request to ex change securities
with DFR approval. To ensure securities are completely recorded in the financial records, DFR is
responsible for preparing quarterly reconciliations between department records and custodian
statements.
During the fiscal year, DFR did not complete quarterly reconciliations between department records and
custodian statements due to staff turnover and prolonged vacancies. When reconciliations are not
performed there is the potential for amounts recorded in the financial records to be incorrec t.
We recommend department management ensure reconciliations are performed.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The effective and efficient management of statutory deposits continues to be a high priority for the
agency. DCBS aims to have clear and concise documented methodologies, procedures, and accounting
working papers. Transparency is an important value to DCBS. Also, we aim to ensure that all
documentation is available for internal and external review.
This deficiency did not result in a loss of funds, cause the program to be underfunded, or for DCBS to
be at risk of being underfunded. There are other controls in place to ensure compliance from insurance
companies.
DCBS will complete the following in relation to the audit recommendation and the values and aims
noted above:
1. Re-evaluate the methodology used for annual financial statement entries and reports
related to statutory deposits. DCBS will also document methodologies used and create a
procedure for the execution of the work by May 2023.
2. Document methodologies used and procedures for statutory deposits data that is manually
entered. In addition, DCBS will document how all data is reviewed, and by which personnel
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 27
in what position, before it is reported in financial statements. This work will be complete by
June 2023.
3. Create an individual training plan for the securities deposit position, including a plan for
other staff to back up the securities deposit position by May 2023.
4. Create a succession plan for the securities deposit position by July 2023.
5. Develop detailed procedures for the securities deposit position that will require updating
and maintaining, plus be easy to access for personnel backing up the position and oversight
staff, with current draft due by July 2023.
6. Make sure that quarterly reconciliations are completed by designated staff with the
appropriate accounting knowledge, with a list of eligible reviewers to be expanded and
finalized, by July 2023.
7. Make sure reconciling entries are reviewed by staff with the appropriate accounting
knowledge. Such reviews will be communicated to the securities deposit analyst and
records will be corrected where needed. This work to be completed by July 2023.
Anticipated Completion Date:  July 2023
2022-014 Department of Consumer and Business Services
Implement controls to ensure security deposits are properly valued and accurately and
completely reported
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 10.00.00.PO.102; GASB No. 31, paragraph 5; GASB No. 84, paragraph 23
Department management is responsible for ensuring internal controls provide reasonable assurance
that security deposits are accurately and completely reported. The Division of Financial Regulation
(DFR) regulates trust companies who deposit securities as a pledge for faithful conduct. DFR maintains
a detailed listing of security deposits by trust company using quarterly statements provided by the
trust companies. This listing provides the basis for determining whether trust companies are compli ant
with security deposit requirements, identifying the year-end balance for financial reporting, and
calculating related inflows and outflows.
Financial reporting standards require these securities to be reported at book value and for all activity
related to the securities, including withdrawals and exchanges, to be reported as inflows and outflows.
During testing we noted the following errors:
• DFR’s securities listing is used for multiple purposes; therefore, it requires including book,
market, and par values. However, DFR did not use the correct values for some securities for
reporting purposes and security deposits were overstated by $1 million.
• During the fiscal year, the Financial Services Unit changed their procedure from quarterly to
monthly calculations of inflows and outflows. Trust company statements are only available
quarterly, and documentation for detailed transactions is only provided when securities are
withdrawn. Creating monthly processes without the underlying statements resulted in
inflows and outflows being overstated $24.2 million and $23.2 million, respectively.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 28
We recommend the department develop internal controls and processes to ensure year -end balances
and inflows and outflows activity are accurately and completely reported and supp orted by information
readily available from trust companies.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Accurate and complete financial reporting is a high priority for the agency. DCBS strives for excellence
in financial reporting.
DCBS will complete the following in relation to the audit recommendations:
1. DCBS will record trust company activities on a quarterly basis, in alignment with when the
statements are available from trust companies. DCBS Financial Services will retain copies of the
supporting quarterly statements. DCBS will update current procedures to reflect this change.
This work will be complete by May 2023.
2. DCBS Financial Services will collaborate with the DCBS Division of Financial Regulation (DFR) to
ensure the procedures for recording trust company activities are clear for all involved. DCBS
will ensure multiple people are trained on the process to ensure these activities are recorded
accurately and in a timely manner. This work will be complete by June 2023.
This deficiency was a reporting error, did not result in a loss of funds, and did no t impede DCBS’ ability
to properly manage the Divisional of Financial Regulation’s banking program.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 2023
2022-015 Department of Consumer and Business Services
Improve controls over prior period correcting entries
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 10.00.00.PO.102
Department management is responsible for establishing internal controls to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting. The department was required to make two
correcting entries during the current fiscal year, 2022, to correct errors identified during the fiscal year
2021 audit. The department did not consider the impact of these entries on the activities and balances
of fiscal year 2022, resulting in the following errors:
• Performance deposits were overstated $2.3 million;
• Inflows were understated $218 million;
• Outflows were understated $220.2 million; and
• Healthcare provider taxes were overstated $507 thousand.
We recommend department management establish internal controls to ensure the impacts of
correcting entries on fiscal years involved are understood and appropriately reported.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
DCBS will complete the following in relation to the audit recommendations:
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 29
1. Collaborate with DAS SARS to ensure all post-closing adjustments are made and better
understand the impact of these adjustments on the financial statements. This work will be
complete by August 2023.
2. DCBS Financial Services will add a task to the end-of-year checklist to ensure all correcting
entries have been resolved from previous fiscal years. DCBS will ensure multiple accountants
are trained on this process. This will be complete by August 2023.
3. DCBS Financial Services will provide additional training to staff on the Oregon Reinsurance
Program (ORP) and the related health care provider taxes. Multiple accountants will be trained
on the ORP and DCBS will ensure the accounting activities are completed, reviewed, and
released by staff with the proper training. This work will be complete by August 2023.
None of the prior period correcting entries resulted in a loss of funds. To assist in tracking audit
recommendations and needed adjustments, DCBS Financial Services hired an operations and policy
analyst 3 in October 2022. This was a newly created position to assist in the important work done in
Financial Services, and reflects DCBS’ level of commitment to efficient and accurate financial reporting .
Anticipated Completion Date:  August 2023
2022-016 Oregon Department of Transportation
Recommend retaining support for software beginning balances
Significant Deficiency
Oregon Administrative Rules require agencies to retain documentation supporting capitalized assets,
including software costs, for a minimum of 3 years after disposal of the asset (OAR 166 -300-0020).
We requested documentation to support the July 1, 2021, opening balances for Data Processing
Software. The department’s asset listing included 495 individual software assets acquired between
1990 and 2022 totaling $138.9 million. Of the 26 items selected for review, 5 had insufficient
documentation to support the asset’s balance and classification as a capital asset. All 5 of the
exceptions relate to software assets acquired prior to 2008. The reported acquisition cost for the 5
software assets was $1.8 million; projected to the population, the unsupported begin ning balance was
$24.4 million.
After inquiring with agency staff, we found they misunderstood the record retention requirements for
capital assets.
We recommend that department management ensure staff understand the retention requirements for
capital asset costs to ensure that documentation is retained as required.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department will implement the following:
1) Change the process for the capital asset documentation from hard-copy to electronic.
2) Scan and save all fixed asset documentation to the Financial Services share drive.
3) Add language to financial policies defining the retention schedule requirements so tha t staff
can easily verify the required schedule for fixed assets.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 30
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-017 Oregon Liquor and Cannabis Commission
Implement procedures for cash handling
Significant Deficiency
Criteria: OAM 10.10.00.PR.101; OAM 10.20.00.PR.124
Department management is responsible for ensuring internal controls are adequate to provide
reasonable assurance that cash and check related transactions are properly controlled . Specifically,
related to cash handling, state policy requires mail to be opened by two designated persons.
During inquiries regarding mail delivery and financial services processes, department management
stated that at the main office incoming mail was opened, and contents examined by a single person as
standard practice. Initially, mail is split open, sorted, and distributed to applicable financial staff. Mail is
then opened and undergoes an additional sorting by a second individual prior to processing .
Department procedures do not align with state policy for dual custody of cash and checks, and there
were no compensating controls in place to ensure all checks received in the mail were recorded .
We recommend department management implement cash receipting procedures to ensure checks are
safeguarded, properly tracked, and accounted for in the financial records in accordance with state
policy.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OLCC will implement the appropriate procedures to ensure compliance with state policy by
March 31, 2023.
Anticipated Completion Date:  March 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 31
Section III – Federal Awards Findings and Questioned Costs
Management Responses are submitted by agency management and are not subjected to auditing
procedures.
2022-018 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Controls are needed to ensure program expenditures are allowable
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed,
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $245,362 (known) (COVID-19)
Criteria: 24 CFR 576.100; CPD-21-08 III.E.3
Emergency Solutions Grants-Cares Act (ESG-CV) funds may be used for the five regular Emergency
Solutions Grants (ESG) program components, as well as administrative activities: street outreach,
emergency shelter, homelessness prevention, rapid re-housing, and homeless management information
systems (HMIS). They may also be used for additional activities including, but not limited to, temporary
emergency shelter, hazard pay, handwashing stations, cell phones and internet, personal protective
equipment, and laundry. The funds are disbursed to the subrecipients after reimbursement requests
are submitted.
Federal funds totaling $31,894,565 were distributed to 44 subrecipients during fiscal year 2022. We
randomly selected 61 individual distributions made by the department to subrecipients. Subsequently,
we randomly selected an expenditure from each disbursement request and then judgmentally selected
additional expenditures from select disbursements. While gaining an understanding of the department’s
internal control process, we learned the review process for subrecipient disbursement requests did not
include a detailed verification that underlying expenditures were for allowable activities and costs.
Given the department’s incomplete review process, we were unable to verify compliance by testing
those reviews.
The department requested supporting documentation from the subrecipien ts, documentation that
should have been reviewed and retained by the department, for the required audit procedures to be
performed.
Our audit procedures were performed in three stages. First, we randomly selected 61 individual
distributions made by the department to subrecipients, totaling $5,580,560. These disbursements
generally consisted of reimbursement for multiple expenditures made by a subrecipient. Next, we
asked the department to request a listing of expenditures from the subrecipients related to t hose
disbursements. Finally, if provided, we agreed the listings to the disbursement and randomly and
judgmentally selected individual expenditures from the listings for testing.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 32
We were unable to perform any review of 20 disbursements either because we d id not receive a listing
of the subrecipient’s expenditures, or the listing did not agree to the disbursement selected for testing.
These disbursements related to 10 of the 44subrecipients receiving funds in fiscal year 2022 and
$1,475,345 of the $5,580,560 in disbursements selected for testing noted above.
From the expenditure listings we did receive, we randomly and judgmentally selected individual
expenditures to determine whether the supporting documentation agreed to the amount requested for
reimbursement by the subrecipient. Of those 41 individual transactions selected for testing, there was
inadequate or no supporting documentation provided for 29 items, and one instance where the request
exceeded the support. These exceptions resulted in total questioned costs of $245,362.
If requests for funds are not supported by documented expenditures, the department could be
unknowingly reimbursing subrecipients for unallowable costs and activities.
We recommend management implement internal controls to ensure subrecipient reimbursements are
for allowable expenditures.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS had significant staff turnover in FY22, and that coupled with the substantively inc reased number
of subrecipients, lead to a lack of monitoring. OHCS has subsequently hired staff and established
vendor relationships to perform fiscal monitoring as a backup for when staff vacancies exist .
Additionally, OHCS is on track to complete fiscal and program monitoring for all subrecipients of ESG
funds in FY23.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-019 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Controls are needed to ensure subrecipients’ compliance with equipment and real property
requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Equipment and Real Property Management
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.311; 2 CFR 200.313
There are specific requirements when equipment is purchased using federal funds and in use. At a
minimum, procedures for managing equipment must meet the following requirements:
• Property records must be maintained that include key details (e.g. property description, ID
number, Title, etc);
• A physical inventory of the property must be taken, and the results reconciled with the
property records at least once every two years;
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 33
• A control system must be developed to ensure adequate safeguards to prevent loss,
damage, or theft of the property. Any loss, damage, or theft must be investigated; and
• Adequate maintenance procedures must be developed to keep the property in good
condition.
Real property purchased must be used for the originally authorized purpose as long as needed for that
purpose. When real property is no longer needed for the originally authorized purpose, the non -federal
entity must obtain disposition instructions from either the federal awarding agency or pass through
entity.
During our review, we determined OHCS was not monitoring its subrecipients to ensure the equipment
and real property requirements were being met. Because subrecipients were not being monitored, we
were unable to determine if there was a population of equipment and real property on which to
perform our audit testing procedure. As a result, the department may not be in compliance with federal
equipment and real property requirements.
We recommend department management develop internal controls to ensure compliance with federal
requirements for equipment and real property.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS has instituted a procedure for State FY23 which is on track to b e completed for all ESG
recipients; this procedure currently includes a notification and approval process for the tracking of the
acquisition, rehabilitation, renovation, or conversion of property and separately a vehicle purchase and
equipment purchase. We are in the process of refining a control system to ensure adequate safeguards
are in place to prevent loss, damage, or theft. Additionally, we are reviewing our maintenance
procedures to ensure properties are in good condition.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 24, 2023
2022-020 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Controls are needed to ensure buildings renovated for use as emergency homeless shelters are
maintained as shelters for the period required
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 24 CFR 576.102(c)
Federal regulations require that buildings renovated with ESG-CV funds for use as emergency homeless
shelters must be maintained as shelters for not less than a period of 3 or 10 years, depending on the
type of renovation and value of the building.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 34
Initial inquiries with program staff determined that the department was not aware whether its
subrecipients were using program funds to renovate buildings for use as emergency homeless shelters.
Subsequently, program staff indicated the information may be contained in subrecipient
implementation reports. However, there were no known procedures or processes in place to monitor
the use of funds during the fiscal period. Therefore, it is possible buildings renovated with program
funds may not be maintained as emergency shelters for the minimum required time period.
We recommend agency management develop internal controls to ensure buildings renovated for use
as emergency homeless shelters are maintained as shelters for the period required.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Program monitoring for all ESG recipients is on track to be completed for State FY23. Our program
manuals state the restrictive use period requirements for any rehabilitation, renovation, conversion, or
maintenance of real property. OHCS’ program manuals clearly define and outline the requirements for
approval of acquisition-renovation-rehabilitation, expectations regarding restrictive use periods based
on project type, as well as a requirement for an annual certificate of continuing program compliance.
The continuing program compliance requirement allows subrecipients to self -certify that a property is
meeting the required restrictive use requirement and that all populations being served meet eligibility
criteria of the program(s) funding the project. These requirements will be verified and reviewed as part
of program monitoring.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 24, 2023
2022-021 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Controls are needed to ensure compliance with level of effort requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Matching, Level of Effort, Earmarking
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 24 CFR 576.101(c)
When a subrecipient is a unit of general-purpose local government, its ESG-CV program funds may not
be used to replace funds the local government provided for street outreach and emergency shelter
services during the preceding 12-month period unless U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development
determines the local government is in a severe financial deficit. ESG -CV funds should be used to
supplement, not replace those funds.
We determined the department was not monitoring its subrecipients for compliance with level of effort
requirements during our review. Documentation was not available for review, and we were unable to
determine the department’s compliance with this requirement. As a result, local governments could be
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 35
using program funds to replace their funding allocated to street outreach and emergency shelter
services.
We recommend department management develop procedures to ensure compliance with federal
requirements for level of effort and maintain documentation.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Level of Effort monitoring is part of program monitoring for State FY23 which is on track to be
completed for all ESG recipients. OHCS is in the process of designing a self-certification form for
subrecipients to acknowledge and agree to the compliance requirements in which funds may not be
used to replace funds the local government provided for street outreach and em ergency shelter
services.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 24, 2023
2022-022 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Documentation verifying subrecipients have not been suspended or debarred needs to be
retained
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Procurement and Suspension and Debarment
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 180.300; 2 CFR 180.305
Federal regulations require the department verify subrecipients are not suspended or debarred from
receiving federal funds prior to making any disbursements.
We randomly selected a sample of 14 subrecipients to verify whether they were federally suspended or
debarred and determine whether the department performed a verification prior to disbursing progr am
funds. Department management stated subrecipients’ suspension/debarment status was reviewed in
the federal database but was unable to provide documentation demonstrating the review was
performed. Without performing this verification, the department could unknowingly pass federal funds
to a subrecipient that has been federally suspended or debarred. Our independent verification
confirmed the 14 subrecipients selected for testing were not suspended or debarred .
We recommend department management maintain documentation demonstrating subrecipients have
not been suspended or debarred.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 36
Procurement will ensure documentation demonstrating subrecipients have not been suspended or
debarred will be saved in the procurement file.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-023 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Controls need to be strengthened to ensure the required expenditures are spent timely
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: CPD 21-08(III)(B)(2)(c)
Emergency Solutions Grants-Cares Act (ESG-CV) funds were intended to be spent quickly on allowable
activities to address the public health and economic crisis stemming from COVID-19. At least 20% of
the total award was to be spent by September 30, 2021.
Based on our testing, the department was not adequately tracking the percentage or timeliness of
expenditures and did not reach the expenditure milestone. Approximately 18% of the total award was
expended by September 30, 2021. If the 20% milestone is not achieved, HUD is able to recapture up to
20%, or $11.2 million, of the total award.
We recommend agency management develop procedures to ensure grant expenditures are adequately
tracked and spent within the required time period.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS did reach out to HUD and requested an extension of the obligation deadline, however, did not
receive direct approval. Going forward, OHCS will ensure grant management reports and time -bound
expenditure plans are consistently maintained and followed for all OHCS grants and grantees. In
addition, OHCS will perform due diligence and ensure follow-up occurs when needed and
documentation is retained to support our efforts.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 37
2022-024 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Subrecipients need to be monitored to ensure compliance with procurement standards
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 14.231 Emergency Solutions Grants Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: E-20-DW-41-0001, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Procurement and Suspension and Debarment
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.317 - .327; 2 CFR 200.332(d)
Federal regulations state that non-federal entities, including subrecipients, are required to have and
use procurement procedures consistent with state and local laws and regulations and that conform to
the federal procurement standards identified in 2 CFR 200.317 - .327. Pass-through entities, like the
department, are required to monitor subrecipients for compliance with federal regulations and the
terms and conditions of the award.
Inquiries and testing determined the department’s fiscal monitoring procedures, which normally include
review of compliance with procurement standards, were not fully performed during the fiscal year and
only 6 of 45 subrecipients were reviewed. As a result, subrecipients could be out of compliance with
procurement requirements.
We recommend the department ensure subrecipients are monitored for compliance with procurement
requirements.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS had significant staff turnover in FY22, and that coupled with the substantively increased number
of subrecipients, lead to a lack of monitoring. OHCS has subsequently hired staff and established
vendor relationships to perform fiscal monitoring as a backup for when staff vacancies exist .
Additionally, OHCS is on track to complete fiscal and program monitoring for all subrecipients of ESG
funds in FY23.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 38
2022-025 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Perform fiscal monitoring for subrecipients administrative expenditures to ensure compliance
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $121,463 (known) (COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.332(a)(5) and (d)
Department management is responsible for monitoring the activities of subrecipients to ensure
subawards are used for authorized purposes and in compliance with federal requirements. Additionally,
department management is responsible for communicating to subrecipients that they are required to
permit the department and auditors access to their records as necessary to ensure the department is
in compliance with program requirements.
The department passed through program funds to community action agencies (sub recipients) to
provide program delivery, including administrative costs. The department performed fiscal monitoring
for only five of their 18 subrecipients during the audit period due to staff turnover. Fiscal monitoring
includes procedures to address compliance with activities allowed and allowable cost requirements for
administrative costs. Due to the limited fiscal monitoring performed, auditors performed additional
procedures at the subrecipient level to determine whether the department was compliant wi th
program requirements.
We tested a total of 82 transactions, 70 randomly selected and 12 judgmentally selected from the 13
subrecipients that did not receive subrecipient monitoring during the fiscal year. We noted the
following:
• One subrecipient did not respond to audit requests for documentation, resulting in an
inability to test four transactions totaling $4,114.
• One subrecipient did not provide sufficiently detailed documentation to determine whether
7 transactions were for accurate amounts totaling $117,349. Of those seven transactions,
we were unable to determine whether two transactions were for allowable activities or
appropriately categorized as administrative expenditures.
Without adequate monitoring of subrecipients, the department’s ability to ensure compliance with
program requirements is diminished.
We recommend department management perform fiscal monitoring to ensure subrecipients are
expending administrative funds in accordance with program requirements.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 39
OHCS had significant compliance monitoring staff turnover in FY22 which led to a lack of monitoring.
OHCS has subsequently hired a contractor to perform fiscal monitoring of all ESG funded grantees.
OHCS also hired staff to pre-FY22 levels, fully trained all staff and began developing internal working
relationships with program staff to assure operational efficiencies. This includes an annual workshop
with all grantees, internal training, and standardizations of monitoring pr ocesses.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
2022-026 Oregon Housing and Community Services Department
Implement program monitoring over client assistance payments to ensure compliance
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021; ERA 2, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Eligibility
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $21,624 (known); $11,067,350 (likely) (COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.332(d); 2 CFR 200.501(g)
Department management is responsible for monitoring the activities of subrecipients to ensure
subawards are used for authorized purposes and are compliant with federal requirements. Additionally,
department management is responsible for ensuring compliance when a contractor is responsible for
program compliance or the contractor’s records must be reviewed to determine program compliance.
The department provided $140 million and $46 million of phase one program funds to community
action agencies (subrecipients) and a third-party vendor (contractor) to provide program delivery,
respectively; and $132 million phase two program funds to only the contractor. Program delivery
included determining client eligibility and making payments for direct client assistance for rent, utilities,
internet, and other housing related costs. During implementation of the program, the department
provided program manuals to the subrecipients and contractor.
Due to the department’s limited staff, they focused on updating policies and procedures to address
systemic issues identified; however, if a particularly challenging application required the department’s
review, they were available to provide direct assistance. The department did not implement any
predefined, systemic program monitoring of the subrecipients or contractor to ensure direc t client
assistance payments were paid to only eligible clients for only allowable and supported amounts.
Therefore, auditors performed additional procedures at the subrecipient and contractor level to
determine whether direct client assistance payments were paid to eligible clients for allowable
activities.
We tested a total of 62 randomly selected direct client assistance payments at 16 subrecipients
totaling $183,515, and found the following:
• One subrecipient did not respond to audit requests for documentation, resulting in an
inability to test one transaction in the amount of $360.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 40
• One subrecipient did not obtain documentation to support that there was a lease
agreement in place, resulting in questioned costs of $5,775.
When extrapolated to the total population, these errors result in over $2.3 million in likely questioned
costs.
We tested 61 randomly selected contractor direct client assistance payments totaling $374,274, and
found the following:
• One payment where an incorrect landlord was paid in the amount of $2,700. Attempts to
recover the funds have been unsuccessful as of the date of the findin g.
• Two payments where the rental amount was doubled, resulting in overpayments totaling
$5,910.
• Seven payments where amounts already paid were not accurately reflected in the
calculation of assistance provided, resulting in overpayments totaling $4,191.
• Three payments where amounts did not agree to supporting documentation, resulting in
overpayments of $2,181.
• Three payments where there was insufficient documentation for amounts paid, resulting in
overpayments of $432.
• One payment where costs were paid for the same household on alternate applications,
resulting in an overpayment of $73.
When extrapolated to the total population, these errors result in over $8.7 million in likely questioned
costs.
We recommend department management implement predefined, systemic program monitoring to
ensure the subrecipients and contractor are administering program funds in accordance with program
requirements.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS agrees and had we not been operating during a global health pandemic and had we had adequate
time and staffing, we would have addressed this issue more carefully as we have in previous years.
However, given that this was a new program that lacked sufficient time and resources to design, launch
and operate to meet the pressing needs of Oregonians facing eviction and homelessness, the work
required unprecedented action that sometimes fell short of our usual standards for client assistance
payment compliance. OHCS will use these lessons moving forward should we o perate future emergency
programs to move towards best practices.
Lack of staff significantly limited our ability to perform the necessary monitoring. An additional
contractor was brought on to monitor the work of our vendor in February of 2022. The contrac tor
continued to provide program compliance support to OHCS through the end of January 2023. This
contractor was also engaged in other projects and activities as needed during their contract term. The
largest workload was investigating payments or cases that were identified as potentially non-
compliant. All these cases were researched extensively, and findings were identified, and corrective
action and collection activities were started if needed. Out of concern for the lack of administrative
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 41
dollars associated with ERA staff knew an internal compliance effort would also be required. Since the
summer of 2022 OHCS staff have been conducting internal random samples of applications and
payments in addition to the work of our hired contractor. Additionally, this  spring the program
compliance team has engaged in a formalized review process focused on specific agencies
administering ERA funds.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
2022-027 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure Monthly and Quarterly reports are accurate and adequately supported
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021 (COVID-19); ERA 2, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.302(a) and (b)(3); 2 CFR 200.303(a), (c)-(d)
Department management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control that
provides reasonable assurance the department is managing, evaluating, and monitoring the federal
award in compliance with the terms and conditions of the award and taking prompt action when
instances of noncompliance are identified. Additionally, the department is responsible for maintaining
records to allow for submission of reports that are accurate and adequately supported.
We tested four randomly selected monthly reports and found one report did not accurately report the
number of unique households assisted and the amount of the assistance based on the supporting
documentation. The department stated the differences were likely due to a transition in subsystem
reporting formats and delays in report processing.
We tested four quarterly reports, two of which were randomly selected and two of which were
judgmentally selected. We found one report where the cumulative obligation amount did n ot agree to
supporting documentation and were not accurate, and one report where the cumulative obligation and
cumulative expenditures amounts did not agree to supporting documentation and were not accurate.
The department stated these errors were due to erroneously entered information in the federal
awarding agency’s reporting portal.
Information included in these reports is used by the federal awarding agency to determine whether the
department qualifies for receiving reallocation payments, as well as how much of a reallocation would
be awarded to the department. Errors in these reports could result in errors in the federal awarding
agency’s determination of eligibility for funding, and/or the reallocation formula.
We recommend department management update and correct erroneous reports and establish controls
to ensure reported amounts are accurate and adequately supported.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 42
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Numerous Community Action Agencies (CAAs), after months of exponential growth in program
resources without time to strategize and scale operations, reported major capacity issues a chronic
backup of applications at the local level. OHCS took the unprecedented step to augment CAA staff to
contract with a third-party vendor to clear the backlog. This approach rapidly increased production and
moved the federal program closer in line with the state’s then 60-day safe harbor period but came with
additional monitoring and reporting challenges.
OHCS did meet the reporting timelines and requirements of US Treasury. OHCS relied on information
within the applicant tracking system that does have some discrepancies when compared to our
accounting records. These discrepancies are due to various factors such as dates within the s ystem
causing application activity to be pulled into the reporting detail more than once, or the application
tracking system not being updated with the most current payment record information by some
grantees disbursing payments. These variances were overcome by relying on our accounting system
and records as a control source of actual disbursements. During the audit, it was brought to our
attention that the compilation of the application tracking system data at a point in time was not stored
to demonstrate the reconciliation with the accounting information. SOS was then not able to verify the
application tracking system data figures in one monthly reporting instance that were used to support
the numbers reported to US Treasury as the file had likely been overridden. Similarly in one instance,
the quarterly cumulative report was also impacted, however future cumulative figures were reported
correctly.
While OHCS submitted monthly and quarterly reports since program inception that include program
and fiscal information, we acknowledge that there were some discrepancies between systems when
one file was overridden with new information and one other file contained an error. We have taken
steps to ensure data integrity and records retention moving forward and future compilations of the
application tracking system data will be stored to support the point in time reconciliations and figures
reported to US Treasury. One quarterly report will also be refiled if allowable by US Treasury to ensure
quarterly figures reported are accurate. Data integrity is of the utmost importance to the agency, and
we appreciate the thorough review by the auditing team.
Anticipated Completion Date:  June 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 43
2022-028 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act reporting is completed
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021 (COVID-19); ERA 2, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303(a), (c)-(d); 2 CFR 170, Appendix A I(a)
Department management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control that
provides reasonable assurance the department is managing, evaluating, and monitoring the federal
award in compliance with the terms and conditions of the award and ta king prompt action when
instances of noncompliance are identified.
The Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act (FFATA) requires the department to submit
information for any subaward action that equals or exceeds $30,000. Program guidance requir ed the
department to report detailed subaward information directly to the federal awarding agency. This
detailed subaward information encompassed all requirements related to FFATA, and the federal
awarding agency gave the department the option of filing required FFATA reports on their behalf.
The department stated they did not provide the detailed subaward information to the federal awarding
agency to complete FFATA reporting on their behalf, and they did not complete any alternate FFATA
submissions during the fiscal year due to grant award information not being available on the federal
website to file their reports. As a result, the department is not in compliance with FFATA reporting
requirements.
We recommend department management ensure FFATA reporting is completed.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon was not unique. Many states experienced frustration with the lack of clarity in the reporting
process. For example, the National Coalition for State Housing Agencies sent a Feb 8 , 2022 letter to
urge Treasury to fix technology problems with its reporting portal, streamline reporting requirements
and provide technical assistance to ERA grantees. Oregon also experienced challenges getting
responses from Treasury about around reporting questions, but we understand that our federal
partners were also operating under emergency circumstances and were also strained to capacity.
OHCS has attempted multiple times to submit the FFATA, however the award was never made available
to report on within the system. OHCS has also reached out to US Treasury multiple times to confirm
that we were not required to report but have yet to hear directly from US Treasury. OHCS was able to
confirm and received a response from US Treasury that went to another state that grantees were not
required to complete the FFATA on the federal reporting website as US Treasury was doing that on
behalf of the recipient, and OHCS did share that correspondence with SOS. Although US Treasury has
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 44
been nonresponsive, OHCS will continue to attempt to obtain a direct response from US Treasury for
our own records.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
2022-029 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure accessible documentation to evidence compliance with program requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Eligibility
Type of Finding: Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.302(a); 2 CFR 200.332(a)(5)
Department management is responsible for communicating to subrecipients that they are required to
permit the department and auditors access to their records as necessary to ensure the department is
compliant with program requirements. To ensure compliance with program requirements, subrecipient
records must also be sufficiently detailed.
The department passed through $140 million phase one program funds to community action agencies
(subrecipients) to provide program delivery. The department performed limited fiscal monitoring during
the audit period which included procedures to address compliance with activities allowed and allowable
cost requirements for administrative costs. The department did not perform any  program monitoring
during the audit period which primarily addresses compliance with eligibility requirements.
To determine whether the department complied with program requirements for the fiscal year,
auditors attempted to reconcile detailed subrecipient ledgers with the intent of selecting and testing
sample items at each individual subrecipient organization. We noted issues with two individual
subrecipients, resulting in an inability to perform testing procedures over a total of $21,438,521 in
program expenditures.
For the first subrecipient we were able to reconcile their detailed ledgers to the department’s financial
records, however their detailed ledger included pass-through payments to a third organization for
program delivery. As a result of the combination of direct and pass-through payments, we were unable
to obtain sufficiently detailed data that also reconciled to the department’s financial records to select
individual transactions for testing. This subrecipient represents $19,877,962 of the un audited
expenditures.
For the second subrecipient we were able to reconcile their detailed ledgers to the department’s
financial records and select administrative and program transactions for testing. However, the
subrecipient was unresponsive to documentation requests to substantiate expenditures. This
subrecipient accounted for $1,560,559 of the unaudited expenditures.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 45
We recommend department management obtain and reconcile sufficiently detailed subrecipient
ledgers and support to substantiate expenditures to allow for fiscal and program monitoring to ensure
subrecipients are administering program funds in accordance with program requirements.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
To effectively deliver much needed funds to maintain the housing stability of tens of thousands of
Oregonians on the brink of experiencing homelessness during the pandemic, agency staff raced to
stand up a first-of-its-kind “single entry point” program for Oregonians to apply for assistance
regardless of zip code. In our efforts to focus on speed we acknowledge that there was insufficient
planning and capacity to stand up a large-scale emergency program including sufficient assurances our
subrecipients could generate evidence of compliance with program requirements including transaction
level details to assist with reconciliation.
Oregon’s experience is in line with national findings. According to the January 2021 research brief
conducted by the National Low Income Housing Coalition around key program  challenges with
administering emergency rental assistance programs. Survey respondents listed the two most common
limitations to be staff capacity and the completeness of applications. Many agencies leaned on
whatever local capacity was available to develop programs, review, and process applications, make
payments and conduct outreach.
OHCS had significant compliance monitoring staff turnover in FY22 leading to incomplete subrecipient
monitoring reviews. OHCS completing these reviews would’ve ensured subrecipients had adequate time
to produce necessary documentation to evaluate compliance, or if not, subrecipients would’ve been
required to take corrective actions. For fiscal compliance, OHCS hired a contractor to perform fiscal
monitoring of federal funded Grantees. OHCS also hired fiscal staff to pre-FY22 levels, fully trained
them, conducted coordinated working sessions, and reached out to the CAA network for discussions
on improving processes. OHCS continues to work with the contractor for much needed ass istance in
monitoring of back log while internal staff move forward to allow for all monitoring to be back on
schedule and coordinating both fiscal and program compliance during future fiscal years.
Program compliance employees have been hired and compliance efforts are underway. All providers will
have internal compliance visits at regular intervals to ensure they have necessary documents and
eligibility is being determined in compliance with program requirements. Additionally regular and
ongoing check ins and trainings are being offered by program staff. Finally, program compliance teams
are working with the Finance compliance team as well as a contracted expert to develop systems and
processes in alignment with the Finance compliance team. As a result of program compliance efforts, a
risk evaluation is being developed and incorporated into future contracting decisions. Efforts in hiring
and systemic investments in infrastructure, processes, and procedures in addition to partner
communications have taken place to ensure agency readiness in the event another emergency occurs.
As part of our commitment to continual learning, our OHCS research team is collaborating closely with
university and national partners to analyze our ERA program data and findings to see  what themes
emerge for improvement both nationally and in Oregon.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 46
2022-030 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure controls over administrative expenditure limits are properly designed and sufficiently
detailed to ensure compliance
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.023 Emergency Rental Assistance Program (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: ERA 1, 2021 (COVID-19); ERA 2, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303(a), (c)-(d); 15 U.S.C. 9058a(c)(5)(A); 15 U.S.C. 9058c(d)(1)(C)
Department management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control that
provides reasonable assurance the department is managing, evaluating, and monitoring the federal
award in compliance with the terms and conditions of the award and taking prompt action when
instances of noncompliance are identified.
Federal regulations limit the amount of federal funds that can be used for administrative expenditures.
The department periodically prepared tracking spreadsheets during the fis cal year to monitor spending
and ensure administrative expenditure limitations were not exceeded. We reviewed four randomly
selected tracking spreadsheets and noted two tracking spreadsheets where there was insufficient
detail to determine what category expenditures were associated with (administrative versus
programmatic); and three tracking spreadsheets where there was no indication that the expenditures
were within administrative expenditures limitations due to the periodic nature of the tracking.
Without sufficiently designed and implemented controls, the department is at risk for exceeding their
allowable administrative cost limits.
We recommend department management ensure tracking spreadsheets are properly designed and
sufficiently detailed to ensure compliance with administrative expenditures limitations.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
This was a very fast-paced, complex award with multiple layers of funding. OHCS did have and
continues to have a pulse on administrative costs from the various admin funding sources and has not
exceeded those allowable limits. Reporting was routinely compiled to show the various allocations and
expenditures to date, which included administrative costs. Reporting was not provided in a consistent
manner as information from multiple systems was needed, however program and fiscal staff met
regularly to review. OHCS is taking careful steps to design a system that will consistently track awards
while ensuring spending is in alignment with requirements and is distributed in a timely fashion. In doing
so we will create a more consistent framework for tracking new awards to ensure limits and
expenditures are consistently documented.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 47
2022-031 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of the Treasury
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 21.027 Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Fund
(COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: OMB Approved No. 1505-0271, 2022 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding: Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 75.351; 45 CFR 75.352(b); 45 CFR 75.352(d)
When recipients of Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds (CSLFRF) provide award funds
to an entity to carry out objectives of program on behalf of the CSLFRF recipient, the entities receiving
such funding are subrecipients. The recipient has the responsibility to monitor expenditures and
activities subrecipients.
Nearly all the department’s CSLFRF expenditures are comprised of payments to a private organization.
Per the contract, the organization was hired to conduct eligibility assessments for the Emergency
Rental Assistance program and be responsible to ensure only eligible applicants receive rental and
utility assistance payments. CLSFRF funds were used for emergency rental assistance; therefore, the
organization is carrying out a program on behalf of the department. The department then has the
responsibility to monitor the expenditures and activities of the organization .
The department incorrectly identified the organization as a vendor rather than a subrecipient during
the contracting process. Per the guidance above, this was not an appropriate determination because
the organization carries out eligibility determinations of the program. Management acknowledged no
monitoring of the organization was performed during the audit period; therefore, there are no related
key controls for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Although program staff maintain a close working
relationship with the organization, these interactions are not formalized an d documented for the
purpose of subrecipient monitoring.
If subrecipient monitoring is not performed and documented, subawards could be used for
unauthorized purposes and performance goals not met.
We recommend department management reassess the department’s contracting process to
appropriately identify whether an organization is a vendor or a subrecipient . If a subrecipient, we
recommend the department comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements, including developing
related internal controls and processes to monitor the expenditures and activities of the organization.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS performed appropriate due diligence in determining whether organization was a subrecipient or
vendor. Internally OHCS identified the issue of how to classify the organization and used all resources
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 48
available to make the determination. The result of the due diligence and discussion was that OHCS
determined the organization should be classified as a vendor, not a subrecipient.
OHCS will review and strengthen the current process for determination.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-032 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure subrecipient risk assessments and fiscal monitoring are performed and required grant
information is communicated timely to subrecipients
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
(COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2001ORE5C3, 2020 (COVID-19); 2102ORLIEA, 2021;
2102ORE5C6 , 2021 (COVID-19); 2202ORLIEA, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR § 200.332(a) – (h)
Federal regulations require that pass-through entities evaluate each subrecipient’s risk of
noncompliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward to
determine the extent and scope of subrecipient monitoring activities. Monitoring activities should be
based on the results of a given subrecipient’s determined risk. Pass-through entities must also
communicate certain award information to subrecipients as the time of the subaward.
The department, as the pass-through entity, has long-established subrecipient monitoring procedures
broken into two categories: program and fiscal monitoring. Program monitoring is performed by
program-specific staff and focuses on requirements related to certain aspects of Activities Allowed and
Client Eligibility. During FY2022, the department performed program monitoring activities as planned.
Fiscal monitoring reviews compliance requirements related to Allowable Costs, Activities Allowed, and
Earmarking. However, fiscal monitoring activities were limited due to staff turnove r. As a result, limited
fiscal monitoring procedures were performed for 5 of 17 subrecipients, and fiscal monitoring risk
assessments were not performed for any of the 17 subrecipients. Without the performance of
subrecipient risk assessments and adequate fiscal monitoring, the department risks distributing
program funds to subrecipients out of compliance with federal program requirements.
Additionally, we reviewed 5 randomly selected subrecipients to determine whether all required grant
award information was communicated at the time of the subaward. For all of the 5 subrecipients
reviewed, only some of the required information was communicated at the time of the award. The
required information missing in the original grant agreements was communicated via ag reement
amendments several months later. Without timely communication of required grant information,
subrecipients may not have all the information they need for the subaward they received.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 49
We recommend department management ensure subrecipient risk assessments are performed for all
subrecipients and ensure required fiscal monitoring activities are performed based on the results of the
risk assessments. We also recommend department management ensure all required award information
is communicated to subrecipients at the time of the subawards.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS lost critical fiscal monitoring staff and was unable to complete all risk assessments and fiscal
monitoring due to this. OHCS is on track to complete fiscal monitoring and risk assessments for all
subrecipients of LIHEAP in FY23. Additionally, OHCS has established vendor relationships to perform
fiscal monitoring as a backup for when staff vacancies exist.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
2022-033 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure financial reports are submitted
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
(COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2002ORLIEA, 2020; 2102ORE5C6, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2021-012
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR § 200.303(a), (c)-(d); 2 CFR § 200.328
Department management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control that
provides reasonable assurance the department is managing the federal awa rd in compliance with the
terms and conditions of the federal award. Additionally, management is responsible for evaluating and
monitoring the department’s compliance with the terms and conditions of federal awards and taking
prompt action when instances of noncompliance are identified.
Federal Financial Reports, SF-425’s, are required to be submitted annually for each open grant award
ninety days after the end of the federal fiscal year. The department did not submit SF -425’s for two of
the four open grants for the federal fiscal period ended September 30, 2021. This is an improvement
from the prior fiscal year when the department hadn’t submitted any of the SF -425 reports for open
grants.
Department management cited a federal reporting system issue where awards are not appropriately
tied to the correct grant identification number, which has hindered their ability to submit financial
reports. As a result, the department was not in compliance with financial reporting requirements in
accordance with the terms and conditions of their grant agreements.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 50
We recommend department management work with their federal partners to determine if unsubmitted
reports should be completed and to ensure reporting compliance in future fiscal periods.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHCS submitted 2 of the 4 required reports but was unable to submit the remainder due to technical
issues with the federal reporting system. OHCS compiled all requisite reporting information timely and
is in correspondence with the federal funder to enable report submission.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-034 Oregon Housing and Community Services
Ensure review of subrecipient requests for funds verifies immediate cash needs are supported
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program
(COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2001ORE5C3, 2020 (COVID-19); 2102ORLIEA, 2021;
2102ORE5C6, 2021 (COVID-19); 2202ORLIEA, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Cash Management
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR § 200.305(b), (b)(1); 2 CFR § 200.508
Federal regulations require that auditees maintain documentation as needed for the performance of
audit procedures related to the Single Audit. Additionally, regulations require payment advances should
be limited to the minimum amounts needed and be timed to be in accordance with the actual,
immediate cash requirements of the subrecipient for carrying out the approved program.
We reviewed 60 sample cash draws and were unable to obtain adequate supporting documentation for
4 subrecipient requests for reimbursement/advances demonstrating they were appropriate and for
immediate cash needs. We also identified an advance payment for which there w as not an adequate
explanation indicating why an advance was needed. These 5 exceptions totaled $124,304 in
expenditures. Department management cited a breakdown in control process and communicated their
intention to train relevant staff to ensure adequate support is obtained. Without adequate verification
of cash needs, the department could be sending funds to subrecipients that are not for a
reimbursement of expenditures or immediate cash needs.
We recommend department management strengthen internal controls to ensure support for
subrecipient requests for funds adequately documents they are appropriate and for immediate cash
needs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 51
Strong internal controls exist and costs were eventually substantiated and allowable, however OHCS
had significant staff turnover and newer staff processing these advance requests did not gather the
level of detail required by OHCS to substantiate draws in a timely manner. Training has been completed
for FY23.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
2022-035 Department of Human Services
Improve controls over benefit time tracking and discontinuance of federal funding
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $1,866 known
Criteria: 45 CFR 264.1
Federal regulations prohibit federal funding to families that include an adult head -of-household who
has received federal assistance for a cumulative of 60 months, and who do not have an allowed
exception. The Oregon Department of Human Services’ (department) case management system,
Oregon Eligibility (ONE), tracks months counting towards the federal limit. When 60 months is reached,
ONE sends an indicator to the financial subsystem containing funding coding. If Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) benefits continue, they are to be funded with state funds.
The population of cases identified in ONE as having reached 60 cumulative federal months is obtained
from the quarterly performance data reports compiled by a service provider.  As stated in a separate
finding, titled ‘Ensure performance data reports are complete and accurate,’ we determined the data
reports are not complete or accurate, therefore, the population of cases over 60 federal months is also
incomplete. However, we tested some cases in the reports to verify ONE was accurately counting
federal months and to determine if federal funding was appropriately discontinued.
We randomly selected ten cases from an incomplete population of 3,193 and found one case where
federal funding inappropriately continued after reaching 60 months due to a coding issue within the
financial subsystem, resulting in federal overpayments of $1,944 for recurring monthly cash assistance
benefits, and $1,866 for expenses related to seeking employment (JOBS) in fiscal  year 2022.
The department was aware of the cash assistance coding issue and the JOBS coding issue as early as
October 2021. A $5.6 million correction for regular cash assistance was made in accounting records in
September 30, 2022, which corrected the cash assistance benefits portion of the error noted above.
The JOBS coding issue has yet to be corrected in accounting records and the department did not have
an adjustment total readily available. As the regular cash assistance correction surpassed $5 milli on, we
have reasonable assurance that the uncorrected federal JOBS payments also exceed $25,000 in likely
questioned costs.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 52
We recommend department management make timely corrections to federal/state coding splits in the
financial subsystem and also make timely corrections in state accounting records. We also recommend
the department reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department will analyze and identify the missing indicators sent from ONE to the financial
subsystems to determine the correct funding stream. The Strategic Systems Unit will put together a
TANF funding matrix to be approved by program. Indicators will be corrected through a system defect,
a Work Item, or Change Request, depending on the Level of effort to resolve.
Financial adjustments will be made by Office of Financial Services to credit the TANF federal grant
rather than reimbursing, per instructions outlined in TANF-ACF-PI-2006-03.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-036 Department of Human Services
Ensure performance data reports are complete and accurate
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2021-009, 2020-013, 2019-008
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 265.7(a) and (b) and (f)
Federal regulations require the department to collect monthly and report quarterly certain financial and
non-financial data elements for services paid with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
federal funding in the ACF-199 TANF data report. Federal regulations also require the department to
report data quarterly for TANF eligible clients whose benefits are paid with designated state funds
called maintenance of effort (MOE) in the ACF-209 SSP-MOE data report. Both data reports should be
supported by applicable performance records.
During fiscal year 2021, the department transitioned key aspects of the TANF program to Oregon
Eligibility (ONE) for case management, while TANF child welfare payments continued to be recorded in
OR-Kids the child welfare system. The department contracts with a service provider to extract data
from ONE and OR-Kids to populate the data reports. Program staff currently work with the service
provider to obtain comprehensible data reports prior to submission to review them for errors and when
found, each issue is logged as a defect for the service provider to correct.
The department and the U.S. Administration for Children and Families identified data reports submitted
for state fiscal year 2022 were incorrect. The federal quarterly report ended September 30, 2021, was
revised and resubmitted but still had likely errors according to program staff. Quarterly reports ended
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 53
December 31, 2021 (Q1), March 31, 2022 (Q2), and June 30, 2022 (Q3), were corrected and resubmitted
in February 2023.
Data reports are comprised of individual component reports identified by “T” for ACF-199 TANF and “M”
for ACF-209 MOE. We reviewed the resubmitted Q1, Q2, and Q3 reports and found:
• The Q1 TANF T2 and MOE M2 reports corrected a prior known defect. The fields identifying
work participation have populated associated fields with job type and hours.
• The Q3 T6 report showing number of applications, number and types of families, and
amount of assistance, reported $4.5 million more than supported by accounting records.
• The April 2022 T1 report contained 4,035 case numbers not found in the underlying system
records, and 1,081 from system records not reported in the T1 report.
• OR-Kids cases in the Q1, Q2, and Q3 T1 24 of 45 fields left blank.
• In 10 of 21,171 cases recorded as having surpassed the federal funding limit of 60 months in
the Q1, Q2, and Q3 T2 reports, we found three where the T2 reports did not agree to
support in ONE.
As the performance data reports are known to be incomplete and inaccurate, we are unable to test
them for compliance with federal reporting requirements. To date, the implementation of ONE has not
resolved findings related to performance data reporting, which have been ongoing since fiscal year
2010. Though the department has yet to receive a Service Organization Control (SOC) report from the
service organization administering ONE and compiling data reports the department is in the process of
contracting for a SOC report. Without an annual SOC report, the department does not have assurance
controls are functioning as intended at the service organization for the TANF program.
We recommend department management continue to review ACF-199 and ACF-209 reports prior to
submission and monitor known compilation defects to ensure performance data reports submitted are
complete and accurate. We also recommend department management obtain an annual SOC report
over the service organization’s internal controls for the ONE application.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department continues to review ACF-199 and ACF-209 reports prior to submission to identify and
resolve defects. The Department continues to monitor defects, sync up reports design with federal
instructions, and progress towards complete and accurate reporting.
The ACF 199 report issue regarding OR-Kids cases with 24 of 45 fields left blank is currently under
development; mapping has been identified to rectify the missing data and once fixed, the future
submissions will be corrected. The reports will be resubmitted to ACF at the end of the current fiscal
year (for months October 2022 – Sept 2023) to correct previous data. The issue regarding discrepant
case counts between ACF 199 report and OR Kids data extract is under analysis. Child Welfare, TANF,
and our technical team will develop a plan for rectifying and reconciling case numbers.
The Department’s, Oregon Eligibility Partnership, has contracted for a SOC Type 2 audit, through
contract 178884. The first audit review will be utilized to make sure all the reporting requirements and
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 54
functional areas are in place. This means, the first formal audit finding, based on recommendation from
the vendors, will occur in FFY25. Additional internal and external audits are happening on the system.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
2022-037 Department of Human Services
Improve accuracy of cases reported as noncooperating with child support
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 264.30-31
Federal regulations require the department to refer all appropriate individuals in the family of a child to
the child support enforcement agency. If the department determines referred individu als are not
cooperating, without good cause, in establishing, modifying, or enforcing a support order with respect
to the child, then the department must reduce or deny assistance in the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) program. The department faces reduced State family assistance grant
payments for failure to enforce penalties against noncompliant individuals.
In March 2020, the department established good cause exemptions due to Covid for all individuals.
Noncooperation sanctions were reinstated in April 2021, by which time the department had moved its
case management system to Oregon Eligibility (ONE). When a caseworker enters a child support
noncooperation code in ONE, the system should automatically reduce TANF benefits.
The population of cases identified in ONE as not cooperating with child support is obtained from the
quarterly performance data reports compiled by a service provider. As stated in a separate finding,
titled ‘Ensure performance data reports are complete and accurate,’ we determined the data reports
are not complete or accurate, therefore, the population of cases not cooperating with child support is
also incomplete. However, we tested some cases in the reports to verify ONE was appropriately
reducing benefits.
The quarterly performance data reports for periods October 1, 2021, through June 30, 2022, consisted
of 133 unique cases identified as not cooperating with child support. We randomly selected 14 cases
and could not find support in ONE for noncooperation. The department identified one case entered in
ONE incorrectly by a caseworker and the remaining cases had various nuances causing the
performance data reports to retrieve the information incorrectly. All 14 cases were either cooperating
with or not applicable to child support. The department also identified at least eight defects in child
support data retrieval it reported to the service provider.
We are unable to determine if ONE is correctly reducing TANF benefits when a case is not cooperating
with child support.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 55
We recommend department management ensure noncooperative child support cases from ONE are
completely and accurately reported in its performance data reports.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department has logged defects to correct Federal reporting requirements. The ONE system
approving eligibility without a cooperation record was addressed through a defect and system build
which corrected the issue on May 10, 2023. The Department has logged a defect to correct historic
records where referrals were not sent; currently awaiting input from Division of Child Support.
The system defect fix for issues identified related to incorrect values of child support cooperation
status in ACF reports is currently in the development and testing cycle. Once the fix is deployed, future
submissions will have correct data for this element. The reports will be resubmitted to ACF at the end
of the current fiscal year (for months October 2022 – Sept 2023) to correct previous data.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-038 Department of Human Services
Ensure work participation rate calculation uses verified and accurate data
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Special Test and Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2021-010, 2020-014, 2019-009
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 261.61-62, 65
Federal regulations require each state maintain adequate documentation, verification, and internal
control procedures to ensure the accuracy of data used in calculating work participation rates. Each
state must have procedures to count and verify reported hours of work and must comply with its Work
Verification Plan as approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
Oregon’s Work Verification Plan outlines a system of controls for how reported hours will be verified
and documented, and for reviews and monitoring procedures to identify errors.
Work participation hours are reported via the quarterly Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) ACF-199 data reports and for benefits paid with designated state funds called maintenance of
effort (MOE), the ACF-209 reports. As stated in a separate finding, titled ‘Ensure performance data
reports are complete and accurate,’ we determined the data reports are not complete or accurate.
However, we found the department did correct a previous issue in which work participation hours on
the ACF-199 report were left blank. Although reports were known to be incomplete, we reviewed the
reporting periods October 1, 2021, through June 30, 2022, to test for compliance of the Work
Verification Plan.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 56
We reviewed 20 randomly selected ACF-199 cases from a population of 16,249, and 20 randomly
selected ACF-209 cases from a population of 146,324 of participating clients for verification of work
activity participation. We found:
• Five of 20 ACF-199 cases with reported participation hours did not agree with hours in the
system of record TRACS.
• 14 of 20 ACF-199 cases lacked support for the reported hours.
• 9 of 20 ACF-209 cases lacked support for the reported hours.
These inaccurate or unverified hours were reported to DHHS for use in calculating the work
participation rate. If the state fails to follow the approved Work Verification Plan, DHHS may penalize
the state.
We recommend TANF program management ensure the work participation rate is calculated
appropriately using verified and accurate participation data in adherence to the department’s Work
Verification Plan. We also recommend program management review the system of controls and
identify where improvements are needed to ensure compliance with the work verification plan.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department will develop training specific to error trends based on Quality Control audits of t he
JOBS program, skill enhancement/best practices on collecting and documenting accurate attendance,
and technical training on the Department’s attendance documentation system, TRACS. The training will
be instructor led and offered at minimum on a quarterly basis.
The Department will review and edit tools, resources, and attendance logs to ensure compliance with
the work verification plan. Updates made will be communicated to staff working with families receiving
TANF.
The Department will also form a workgroup to review the attendance documentation and case
management system known as the Transition Referral and Client Self-Sufficiency (TRACS) system. The
workgroup will make recommendations to developer, which will include system enhancements and
edits to improve the process for staff.
Anticipated Completion Date: April 30, 2024
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 57
2022-039 Department of Human Services
Improve documentation of required income and benefit verifications
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding: Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding: 2021-011
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 205.55
Federal regulations require each state to participate in the Income Eligibility and Verification System
(IEVS), which for Oregon, includes using income and benefit screens accessible through  Oregon
Employment Department, Internal Revenue Service, and Social Security Administration, when making
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) eligibility determinations. The department’s current
procedure instructs caseworkers to narrate “IEVS checked” in the case management system, Oregon
Eligibility (ONE), after reviewing all appropriate IEVS screens at the time of eligibility determination. The
department submitted change requests to the eligibility system’s service provider that would prohibit
ONE from paying benefits until all IEVS screens are checked; however, the system change has not yet
been completed.
From a population of 105,267 TANF benefit payments recorded in ONE we randomly selected a sample
of 40 and two additional individually significant payments for testing. We found in 16 cases, there was
no narration of the IEVS check by caseworkers, in either ONE or the former narrative system. We
verified these clients did meet the TANF eligibility criteria related to IEVS screens, however, b y not
providing assurance of verification of the use of IEVS screens, the department increases the risk of
providing benefits to TANF ineligible applicants.
We recommend department management ensure verification of income and benefits with IEVS screens
is clearly documented in client case files when determining client eligibility.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department is implementing a new tool, Note Buddy, to assist workers with case notes when
determining eligibility. Note Buddy will include a field that allows staff to select whether IEVS was
checked. Staff will be encouraged, not mandated, to use Note Buddy.
The Department will form a small workgroup to discuss options for revising and lowering the level of
effort for the Change Request (CR) previously submitted. The Department will re -submit the CR for
changes to ONE.
Anticipated Completion Date: September 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 58
2022-040 Department of Human Services
Improve controls to ensure eligibility criteria are met
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2021G996115, 2021; 2022G996115, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Eligibility
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $9,569 (known); $931,750 (likely)
Criteria: 45 CFR 264.1; Oregon TANF State Plan
The State of Oregon Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) State Plan (Plan) defines
financial neediness criteria with its adjusted income limit tables. Federal regulations establish 60
cumulative months as the length of time a client may receive federal TANF assistance. The department
uses its case management system, Oregon Eligibility (ONE), to count federal -eligible benefit months,
and when 60 months is reached, an indicator is sent to the financial subsystem to change federal
funding to state funding.
From a population of 105,267 TANF benefit payments recorded in ONE, we randomly selected a sample
of 40 and two additional individually significant payments for testing. We found:
• One sample’s financial eligibility information included a disaster relief benefit without details
showing the date of payment and the covered time period. As a result, auditors and the
department are unable to determine if this case met financial eligibility criteria, resulting in
questioned costs of $1,311.
• One individually significant case’s child support and spousal support were entered
incorrectly into ONE. The countable income at time of certification did not meet the
adjusted income limit, making the client ineligible for TANF benefits. Questioned costs for
this case total $8,258.
We recommend department management ensure federally-funded client benefits are paid on behalf of
eligible individuals, and documentation is retained to support eligibility decisions.  We also recommend
department management correct the identified error cases and reimburse the federal agency for
questioned costs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department will communicate to eligibility staff the importance of reviewing information reported
by the applicant compared to information received from a third-party and direct staff to case note in
the ONE system how the discrepancy was reconciled. The Department will also communicate the
requirement to maintain eligibility records in both case notes and electronic file wh en applicable.
The Department will review the cases cited and make an appropriate referral to the Overpayment
Recovery Unit. Overpayments recouped can then be adjusted by Office of Financial Services to credit
the TANF federal grant rather than reimbursing, per instructions outlined in TANF-ACF-PI-2006-03.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 59
Anticipated Completion Date: October 31, 2023
2022-041 Oregon Health Authority
Ensure expenditures of federal funds are recorded to the appropriate program
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
(COVID-19)
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  93.958:  1B09SM083994, 1B09SM085378 (COVID-19)
93.959:  1B08TI083513, 1B08TI083963 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Type of Finding:  Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  93.958 - $2,268,421 (known COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303; 42 USC 300x-1
The department was required to submit a spending plan documenting the intended use of the awarded
COVID-19 funding allocations under the Mental Health Block Grant (MHBG) and Substance Abuse Block
Grant (SABG). The expenditure of COVID-19 funding should align with each block grant’s approved
spending plan. Federal regulations also require recipients of federal awards establish and maintain
internal controls designed to reasonably ensure compliance with federal statutes, regulations, and
terms and conditions of the Federal award.
Our testing of state fiscal year 2022 MHBG COVID-19 expenditures identified $10.4 million in workforce
development incentive payments inappropriately recorded under the MHBG. Further inquiry into the
payments revealed the department determined during state fiscal year 2023 these expenditures were
not included in the MHBG COVID-19 spending plans and were not allowable activities under the MHBG.
The department determined incentive payments totaling $8.1 million in COVID-19 expenditures should
have been recorded under the SABG in accordance with the SABG COVID -19 spending plans. The
department subsequently moved the $8.1 million of the combined $10.4 million total COVID -19
incentive payment expenditures to the SABG; however, the remaining $2. 3 million in incentive payment
expenditures were left in the MHBG as a funding source had yet to be determined.
An adjustment to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (SEFA) was required to move the
$8.1 million in COVID-19 spending from the MHBG to SABG. The remaining $2.3 million is considered
questioned costs under the MHBG.
We recommend department management ensure controls are properly designed and implemented to
record only allowable expenditures to the appropriate federal programs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The identified expenditures were initially charged to the MHBG in error, and when the error was found
by OHA staff, the funding source was corrected to SAPT for the authorized $8.1 million prior to the
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 60
SOS audit beginning. There was still $2.3 million remaining coded to MHBG which after extensive review
and leadership decision, has now been re-coded appropriately. OHA’s existing internal controls
identified this issue initially, no additional corrective action is needed.
Anticipated Completion Date: July 5, 2023
2022-042 Oregon Health Authority
Ensure expenditures of federal funds are for allowed activities
Federal Awarding Agency:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name:  93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  1B09SM083823, 2021
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Type of Finding:  Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  $525,272 (known)
Criteria: 42 USC 300x-5(a)(3)
Mental Health Block Grant (MHBG) funds may not be expended on the purchase, construction, or
permanent improvement of any building or other facility other than minor remodeling. Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’s (SAMHSA) standard funding restriction guidance
defines minor alterations and renovations as the lesser of 25% of the budget period or $150 thousand.
Additionally, all minor alterations and renovations must be approved by SAMHSA.
During our testing of MHBG subrecipient contracts entered into during state fiscal year 2022, we noted
one contract included payment for the remodeling of an existing building owned by the subrecipient. A
payment of $525,272 was processed in December 2021 for the remodeling expenses as specified in the
contract's payment provisions. However, this amount exceeds SAMHSA's threshold for minor
alterations and renovations and is not allowed under the MHBG.
We recommend department management ensure controls are properly designed and implemented to
record only allowable expenditures to the MHBG. We further recommend department management
seek SAMHSA approval for minor alterations and renovations.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
OHA intended to have an interagency agreement with ODHS to co-fund an improvement to a much-
needed treatment facility for children. OHA submitted the payment per our agreement with the vendor
with the expectation that ODHS would fund the non-SAMHSA allowable expenses. The vendor used the
funds for minor safety related renovations as one would expect them to prioritize before programmatic
costs. But unfortunately, the ODHS payment was never made to OHA which prevented any add itional
funds from being sent to the vendor. Then, pandemic constraints along with a lack of funding
prevented the vendor from being able to finalize their plan in the initial time frame. OHA sought a legal
review, and the recommendation was made to cleave the contract from ODHS and allow the vendor
additional time to finish their work. Upon cleaving the contract, the elements that OHA knows to be
unallowable for SAMHSA funding were left in the contract because the contractor had already
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 61
performed the work. OHA is awaiting a final review of expenditure reports and will request SAMHSA
approval if warranted or adjust funding codes as needed to align with SAMHSA allowable charges.
Anticipated Completion Date: September 30, 2023
2022-043 Oregon Health Authority
Implement controls to ensure subrecipients are appropriately identified and monitored
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services;
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  93.958:  1B09SM082625, 2020; 1B09SM083823, 2021;
1B09SM086032, 2022;
93.959:  1B08TI083068, 2020; 6B08TI083472, 2021;
6B08TI084667, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding:  Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.331; 45 CFR 75.352(b); 45 CFR 75.352(d)
Federal regulations require pass-through entities to determine if the recipients of disbursements of
federal funds are subrecipients or contractors. The subrecipient and contractor determination will
impact which federal compliance requirements recipients are subject to and how program expenditures
are reported on the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (SEFA). For recipients meeting the
definition of a subrecipient, federal regulations require pass-through entities to evaluate each
subrecipient’s risk of noncompliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of
the subaward for the purpose of determining appropriate subrecipient monitoring activities.  Monitoring
activities should be completed based on the results of the subrecipient’s  determined risk to ensure
subawards are used appropriately.
We reviewed the department’s classification of a sample of eight of 40 Mental Health Block Grant
(MHBG) and 11 of 76 Substance Abuse Block Grant (SABG) recipients of federal funds. We judgmental ly
selected an additional 11 MHBG and 30 SABG recipients for review after our review of the initial sample
of recipients identified inconsistencies in the classification of recipients. Based on the following
inconsistencies identified in our review, it is unclear if the department correctly classified recipients as
subrecipients or contractors and the related expenditures are reported accordingly. As a result, the
SEFA may incorrectly report pass-through or direct expenditures.
• One recipient of MHBG funds and 13 recipients of SABG funds were classified as
contractors by the department; however, other recipients providing the same services
were classified as subrecipients. As they were identified as contractors, a SEFA correction
of $1.4 million was made to report as direct expenditures rather than pass-through
expenditures.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 62
• Three recipients of MHBG funds and one recipient of SABG funds were classified as
subrecipients by the department, but it was unclear if each met the definition of a
subrecipient.
• One recipient of MHBG funds was classified as a contractor and appeared to meet the
definition of a contractor; however, payments made to this recipient were recorded as
pass-through expenditures. A SEFA correction of $329 thousand was made to report as
direct expenditures rather than pass-through expenditures.
• One recipient of SABG funds was classified as neither contractor nor subrecipient. A SEFA
correction of $215 thousand was made to report as direct expenditures rather than pass -
through expenditures.
We also inquired of the department’s risk assessment and monitoring activities for subrecipients. Based
on our inquiries, the department does not have a formal implemented process for performing risk
assessments to determine appropriate monitoring activities. Moreover, the department has not
implemented a formal process to ensure subrecipients comply with federal regulations, terms and
conditions of the subaward, and that subaward performance goals are achieved. If subrecipient
monitoring is not performed and documented, subawards could be used for unauthorized purposes and
performance goals not met.
We recommend department management ensure recipients of federal funds are appropriately
identified as subrecipients or contractors and the corresponding disburseme nt of federal funds are
appropriately reported as direct or pass-through expenditures. We further recommend department
management comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements, develop and implement internal
controls to ensure risk assessments are performed and documented for each subrecipient, and
monitoring activities are completed and documented according to risk assessment results.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
HSD Contracts team has already implemented additional checklists to ensure subrecipients and
vendors are identified and coded properly. We will be making the checklist automated through our
grant management process and fully implemented by this fall.
Anticipated Completion Date: November 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 63
2022-044 Oregon Health Authority
Implement a consistent methodology for calculation of maintenance of effort
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services;
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  93.958:  1B09SM082625, 2020; 1B09SM083823, 2021;
1B09SM086032, 2022
93.959:  1B08TI083068, 2020; 6B08TI083472, 2021;
6B08TI084667, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Matching, Level of Effort, Earmarking
Type of Finding:  Material Weakness
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 42 USC 300x-2(a)(1)(C); 42 USC 300x-4(b)(1); 42 USC 300x-9(c)(1); 42 USC 300x-22(b)(1)(C);
42 USC 300x-30(a); 2 CFR 200.303
The Mental Health Block Grant and Substance Abuse Block Grant are subject to various Maintenance of
Effort and Earmarking requirements. These requirements ensure the department meets minimum
expenditure thresholds. Federal regulations require recipients of federal awards establish and maintain
internal controls designed to reasonably ensure compliance with federal laws, regulations, and program
compliance requirements.
Based on auditor recalculations, we determined the department was in compliance with the applicable
Maintenance of Effort and Earmarking requirements during state fiscal year 2022. However, we noted
the following control weaknesses in the department’s calculations and demonstration of their
compliance with the requirements:
• The department is required to expend 10% of the federal award for early serious mental
illness and a first episode psychosis treatment services under the Mental Health Block
Grant. The 10% set aside is calculated and budgeted when federal awards are granted.
However, tracking of expenditures is not performed to ensure compliance is achieved .
• The department is required to maintain state expenditures for community mental health
services and authorized substance abuse activities at a level not less than the average
expenditures of the prior two state fiscal years. The department is also required to ensure
expenditures for systems of integrated services for children with serious emotional
disturbance and substance abuse treatment for pregnant women and women with
dependent children is not less than the amount expended for these services in fiscal year
1994. The applicable expenditures were not consistently or accurately calculated by the
department in each of the state fiscal years included in the Maintenance of Effort
determinations. Additionally, no written procedures exist for the calculations.
The department is at risk of noncompliance without controls in place to help ensure expenditures are
tracked and calculations are consistently applied across fiscal years.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 64
We recommend department management implement controls to ensure applicable expenditures are
adequately tracked and calculations applicable to the maintenance of effort requirements are
consistently performed across fiscal years. We further recommend department management work
with the federal awarding agency to submit corrected maintenance of effort totals to ensure
appropriateness of future maintenance of effort determinations.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
There were inconsistencies in how Maintenance of Effort (MOE) has been calculated. The applicable
expenditures were not consistently or accurately calculated in each state fiscal year. The use of
Marijuana paid expenses were not consistently used for both Mental Health and Substance Abuse Block
Grant. We have met with SAMHSA MHBG State Project Office (SPO) for clarification on how Marijuana
funds can be utilized in the calculation for the MOE. We have received guidance and clarification . We
have recalculated MOE for the Block grants for SFY2022, SFY2021, and SFY2020 and are still doing
data checks on these recalculations. With any changes to be made to previous years’ MOE calculations,
we must resubmit the request and reasons behind the changes to the SAMHSA project officers. HSD
Budget is working on a written desk procedures to ensure applicable expenditures are adequately
tracked and calculated to the maintenance of effort requirements and are consistently performed.
Anticipated Completion Date: February 28, 2024
2022-045 Oregon Health Authority
Submit required FFATA reports
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements;
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases;
93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services;
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  93.268:  5 NH23IP922626; 6 NH23IP922626
93.323:  6 NU50CK000541
93.958:  1B09SM083823, 2021
93.959:  6B08TI083472, 2021; 6B08TI084667, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Reporting
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 170 Appendix A; 2 CFR 200.303
Federal regulations require recipients of federal awards to report certain subaward information in the
FFATA Subaward Reporting System (FSRS) for subawards meeting the criteria for reporting. Reports
must be submitted no later than the end of the month following the month in which the subawards
were made. Federal regulations also require recipients of federal awards establish and maintain internal
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 65
controls designed to reasonably ensure compliance with federal laws, regulations, and program
compliance requirements.
We identified and reviewed the reporting status of all the department’s subawards subject to FFATA
reporting during the audit period. We determined:
• Five of 30 Mental Health Block Grant (MHBG) subawards were not reported, totaling $4.2
million in obligations.
• 12 of 65 Substance Abuse Block Grant (SABG) subawards were not reported, totaling $6.2
million in obligations.
• Four of 37 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity (ELC) subawards were not reported,
totaling almost $55.5 million in obligations.
• Five of 39 Immunization Cooperative Agreements subawards were not reported, totaling
$6.3 million in obligations.
Of the total not reported, one SABG, one ELC, and two Immunization subawards were not reported in
the FSRS due to oversights in the department’s reporting process. The remaining unreported
subawards resulted from the department’s suspension of FFATA reporting stemming from the federal
replacement of the DUNS number with the Unique Entity Identifier (UEI) in May 2022. The department
did not have UEI numbers for all subrecipients at the time of the replacement which prevented the
department from submitting accurate reports. FFATA reporting was suspended through the end of
state fiscal year 2022 and into the following state fiscal year.
Although the department suspended FFATA reporting in the FSRS, a tracking spreadsheet was
maintained that included all subaward award information needed for reporting once reporting is
resumed.
We recommend department management resume FFATA reporting as soon as feasible and ensure all
necessary subawards are reported. We further recommend department management implement
controls to ensure all subawards are appropriately tracked and reported.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
On April 4, 2022, the federal government made a switch in the identifying information required for a
subrecipient, changing from the previously used DUNS to a newly assigned Unique Entity Identifier
(UEI). ODHS/OHA was not made aware of the upcoming federal switch until late March 2022. OHA’s
Office of Contracts & Procurement (OC&P) is working directly with Program Contract Administrator’s
to request the missing UEIs. As the data comes in from Program it is being validated for accuracy and
updated in the appropriate systems, so when all missing UEIs from a given FAIN’s report month are
collected, all NTE changes can be made immediately. OC&P is confident all FFATA reporting related to
this audit will be submitted by July 31, 2023.
Anticipated Completion Date: July 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 66
2022-046 Oregon Health Authority
Ensure cash draws are made only for immediate cash needs
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 6B08TI083472, 2021
Compliance Requirement: Cash Management
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 31 CFR 205.33
The Substance Abuse Block Grant is subject to federal cash management requirements. Federal
regulations require the state minimize the time between the drawdown and disbursement of federal
funds. The department’s normal draw procedure for the block grant is designed to reques t federal
funds on a reimbursement basis. The amount to be drawn is calculated based on a comparison between
previously drawn revenue amounts and program expenditures at the time of the draw.
During our testing of a sample of three of the 15 cash draws performed during state fiscal year 2022,
we identified an error in the calculation of a draw performed in April 2022 for the 2021 award.  The
process used to identify program revenues and expenditures for the draw calculation was incorrectly
updated when the department transitioned to a new data analysis tool. As a result, the April 2022 draw
requested $1 million in federal funds in excess of actual expenditures. The error in the query was not
identified by the department through the end of the fiscal year. The total drawn on the award at the
end of state fiscal year 2022 was in excess of expenditures by $847 thousand.
Although the 2021 award was drawn in excess of expenditures at times after April 2022, the total
revenues and expenditures were balanced at the close out of the award in December 2022.
Additionally, according to Federal regulations no interest liability is incurred even though the draws
were in excess of the immediate cash needs of operating the program.
We recommend management ensure controls over the draw process are designed and implemented to
review and identify calculation errors.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
This was a criteria filter error in the accountant’s data query as developed in the transition from one
query tool to another. This criteria filter has been corrected and the data query is now operating
correctly. The referenced grant is currently in balance, revenue is balanced to expenditures. The
reconciliation, which would have identified this anomaly, was delayed for this quarter. In the future, a
full reconciliation to the general ledger system of record will occur quarterly to ensure this is not
repeated.
Anticipated Completion Date: November 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 67
2022-047 Oregon Health Authority
Implement controls to comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.788 Opioid STR (Non-major program)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: H79TI081716, 2020; H79TI083316, 2021
Compliance Requirement: Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2019-019
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 75.303(d); 45 CFR 75.351; 45 CFR 75.352(b) and (d)
Federal regulations require that pass-through entities evaluate each subrecipient’s risk of
noncompliance with federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward for the
purpose of determining appropriate subrecipient monitoring activities . Monitoring activities should be
completed based on the results of the subrecipient’s determined risk. Federal regulations also require
grantees take prompt action when instances of noncompliance are identified in audit findings.
The Health Systems Division of the Oregon Health Authority (department) developed a formal process
for performing risk assessments to determine appropriate monitoring activities and developed a tool to
document post award monitoring in March of 2020, and for three years, the department has pointed to
these procedures as actions taken to partially correct the original 2019 finding . However, the
department has yet to implement these or other procedures, and the Opioid program has no
documented monitoring plan in place.
Federal regulations require the department, as a pass-through entity, to determine if the recipients of
disbursements of federal funds are subrecipients or contractors. The subrecipient and contractor
determination will impact how program expenditures are reported on the Schedule of Expenditures of
Federal Awards (SEFA). Out of 75 contracts with 59 subrecipients,  we reviewed 15 contracts with 10
subrecipients and based on the contracts’ listed deliverables, we determined five of them did not
appear to meet the definition of a subrecipient. Department management could not support its
subrecipient determinations and could not identify who made the decisions.  As a result, the SEFA may
incorrectly report $751,911 as pass-through funds instead of direct expenditures.
We recommend department management comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements by
implementing and documenting a procedure that evaluates each subrecipient’s risk of noncompliance
for the purpose of determining and performing the appropriate monitoring for each subrecipient. We
also recommend department management implement procedures to ensure federal subrecipient
versus contractor determinations result in accurate reporting on the SEFA.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
To comply with subrecipient monitoring requirements, the authority will implement our documented
procedures. We will evaluate subrecipient’s risk of noncompliance for the purpose of determining and
performing the appropriate monitoring for each subrecipient. We will ensure each subrecipient
completes the grantee self-risk assessment survey we’ve created; once completed and submitted this
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 68
survey will generate a monitoring guidance document based on if the grantee was determined low,
moderate, or high risk. This risk assessment survey and guidance document will help inform appropriate
subrecipient monitoring. The auto-generated word document is emailed to the identified OHA staff,
stored in the software’s report, and can be accessed by staff on an OHA intranet page (OWL site).
Additionally, the authority will ensure accurate federal subrecipient versus contractor determinations.
We will evaluate and improve current determination procedures, develop a comprehensive checklist or
guidance document based on improvement recommendations, determine who has the primary
responsibility for subrecipient determinations, and provide training as needed.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-048 Oregon Health Authority
Improve review of federal performance progress reports
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.788 Opioid STR (Non-major program)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: H79TI081716, 2020; H79TI083316, 2021
Compliance Requirement: Reporting
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: 2019-020
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 45 CFR 75.303(a); 45 CFR 75.342(b); Opioid STR Notice of Awards
Federal regulations require performance progress reports (reports) be submitted semi-annually and
include an overview of the goals and objectives accomplished during the funding period as stated in the
grants’ funding opportunity announcements. In addition, federal regulations require award grantees to
establish and maintain effective internal control that provides reasonable assurance the award is
managed in compliance with regulations and terms and conditions of the award.  Effective controls may
include review and approval of reports for completeness and accuracy.
The Health Systems Division of the Oregon Health Authority (department) developed a tool to
document post award monitoring in March of 2020, and for three years, the department has pointed to
this tool as an action taken to ensure reports are complete and accurate. Although the department has
yet to implement this tool, we found evidence of other internal controls that were partially
implemented.
Program now utilizes collaborative online software called Smartsheet which allows a contracted
evaluator to compile subrecipient performance data the department can monitor and edit in real time.
The department uses the Smartsheet as support for progress report data. We found some key data
elements in the SOR2 year 2 progress report did not agree to support in Smartsheet. Program stated
they reviewed a different spreadsheet supplied by the evaluator, not Smartsheet,  which had totals
agreeing to the submitted report. However, the department did not retain this additional spreadsheet.
Without retaining the underlying support used for review, we are unable to assess the effectiveness of
the department’s review of the report prior to submission.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 69
Program now requires manager review of reports prior to submission. We found evidence of manager
review of the SOR2 year 2 progress report, however it was dated two days after the report was
submitted. Ineffective controls could result in a misrepresentation of the grant’s performa nce.
We recommend department management implement internal controls to ensure performance progress
reports are complete and accurate prior to report submission.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
To ensure performance progress reports are complete and accurate prior to report submission, the
department will review current internal controls and plans to implement revised or new controls. The
current process steps we are reviewing include:
• Sending the completed report via email to the program manager requesting they review the
report for completeness and accuracy.
• Documenting approval via email confirmation that the report is complete and accurate prior to
submission to federal funders.
There is a need to revisit the internal control of having only managers designated to review the federal
performance progress reports; we plan to discuss having the following individuals designated to
conduct this review: principal investigator, grant coordinator, active partner, o r manager.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-049 Oregon Health Authority
Return overdraw of reclassified FEMA expenditures
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements (COVID-19)
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 93.268:  5 NH23IP922626 (COVID-19);
6 NH23IP922626 (COVID-19)
93.323:  6 NU50CK000541 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: 93.268:  $36,783 (known) (COVID-19)
93.323:  $73,333 (known) (COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.403
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Oregon Health Authority (department) spent money from F ederal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) awards to address needs in addressing the pandemic. Due to
delays in receiving federal reimbursement for the expenditures, the department reclassified the
expenditures to other programs where reimbursements would occur timelier.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 70
In our testing of Activities Allowed or Unallowed, we reviewed two individually significant items in the
accounting system reclassifying 398 and 914 individual expenditures from the FEMA grants to the
Immunization Cooperative Agreements program and Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity program,
respectively. Based upon the account coding of the original transactions, all of the reclassifications
were allowable and consistent with program requirements. However, we found several transactions
were reclassified twice, resulting in an excess of $36,783 charged to the Immunization program and
$73,333 charged to the Epidemiology program. The reclassifications were completed in two batches
and the managerial review of the reclassifying transactions failed to detect some transactions were
included in both batches.
We recommend department management correct the entries and reimburse excess cash drawn to the
federal agency for unallowable costs. We also recommend department management revise the review
procedures to verify that the same expenditure transactions are not duplicated in multiple batches.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective action plan:
• The agency has reviewed the questioned costs and has corrected the entries with BTCL7084
and reimbursed the federal programs.
• The department has regular processes to review for duplicate adjusting entries. However, this
process was missed for this entry.
• Department management will work with department staff to reinforce their understanding of
the need to follow these processes to ensure transactions are not adjusted more than once.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 1, 2023
2022-050 Oregon Health Authority
Improve review of expenditure transactions
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 5 NH23IP922626, 2022 (COVID-19);
6 NH23IP922626, 2022 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirements: Activities Allowed or Unallowed,
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303
During fiscal year 2022, payroll for the Oregon Health Authority was processed through the Oregon
State Payroll Application (OSPA). As part of each monthly payroll cycle, managers are expected to
review and approve employee’s reported hours to ensure expenditures are acc urate and are billed to
the correct program(s). Although state policy requires managers to review the timesheets, the
automated controls in the system will process the payroll without a review, effectively making the
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 71
managerial review optional. The OSPA was retired as of November 30, 2022. However, the new
Workday application that went into effect to replace the OSPA has the same weakness where payroll
will process without regard for the managerial review.
As part of our testing of program expenditures, we found that 3 of 134 timesheets were not reviewed by
a manager prior to release into the payroll system. For each of these items, we were able to perform
alternative procedures to verify that the amounts charged to the program were appropri ate and there
are no questioned costs. However, the lack of review increases the risk that inappropriate payroll costs
may be charged to the program.
We recommend management implement procedures to ensure that all employee payroll submissions
are properly reviewed, and payroll is appropriately charged to the correct cost center or program.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Oregon Immunization Program (OIP) section manager immediately notified all supervisory
managers and administrative support staff of the finding on June 5th. Finding: “As part of our testing of
program expenditures, we found that 3 of 134 timesheets were not reviewed by a manager prior to
release into the payroll system.” Supervisory managers were reminded that i t is an expectation of their
position to ensure that payroll time entries are thoroughly reviewed, and discrepancies resolved, and
final entries approve according to agency requirements – on time, every month.
On June 5th, program administrative staff and the section manager began development of an internal
standard operating procedure (SOP) that will thoroughly document the steps the program requires of
supervisory managers to assure that all employee payroll submissions are properly reviewed and
payroll is appropriately charged to the correct cost center or program. The final SOP will be signed by
each supervisory manager in the program, and included in a quarterly Performance, Accountability and
Feedback (PAF) session between each supervisory manager and the section manager.
The final SOP will be delivered to the offices of the Secretary of State Audit  Division, and DAS once
approved by the Division management, and signed by each OIP supervisory manager.
This finding and the resolution will be shared as well with our funder, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, as required by our cooperative agreement.
Anticipated Completion Date: July 5, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 72
2022-051 Oregon Health Authority
Correct expenditures charged to the incorrect program
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 6 NU50CK000541 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirements: Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $356,050 (COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.302
To address the COVID-19 pandemic, the Center for Disease Control (CDC) awarded the Oregon Health
Authority (department) over $495 million in additional funding beyond the normal funding levels for the
Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases (ELC) program. The funding was
awarded for specific purposes such as enhancing detection, reopening schools, and enhancing
detection expansion. The purposes of these awards generally do not allow for expenditures directly
related to operating the COVID-19 vaccine clinics.
In our testing, we identified two payments totaling $356,050 relating to emergency medical technicians
attending vaccine clinics to assist if those receiving the vaccine had adverse reactions and required
medical attention. Per department management, the transactions should have been charged to a
different grant provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  The error was caused
by incorrect account coding when the invoice was processed. Other transactions under this contract
were properly charged to the FEMA grant.
We recommend management correct the accounting error and ensure the expenditures are charged to
the correct programs. We also recommend the department determine if there are additional
questioned costs relating to the advanced cash draw as the federal programs have different timing for
federal reimbursements.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Corrective action plan:
• Adjust the two identified payments charged to the grant in error
• Adjust the erroneous charges to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) grant
• Complete internal audit of expenditures and adjust any non-grant compliant expenditures out
of this grant prior to federal financial reporting and close-out.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 73
2022-052 Oregon Health Authority
Improve review of expenditure transactions
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 6 NU50CK000541, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirements: Activities Allowed or Unallowed,
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $35,416 (known) (COVID-19)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303
As part of our testing, we reviewed expenditures charged to the program to ensure they were properly
approved and an appropriate use of program resources. We randomly selected 25 of 2,355 non -payroll
transactions as the basis for our testing. For one of the transactions, there was no evidence the
expenditures had been reviewed and approved as appropriate expenditures for the program. The
specific transaction was for cell phones and data plans on wireless devices and consisted of 584
separate devices. Only 24 (2.5%) of those devices had been approved by a manager. The department
will pay the vendor for the full amount of the invoice. Managers are expected to review the charges for
their unit and verify they are directed to the proper cost center. The $35,416 in questioned costs
represents the charges for the devices without approval.
Also, during fiscal year 2022, payroll for the department was processed through the Oregon State
Payroll Application (OSPA). As part of each monthly payroll cycle, managers are expected to review and
approve employee’s reported hours to ensure expenditures are accurate and are billed to the correct
program(s). Although state policy requires managers to review the timesheets, the automated controls
in the system will process the payroll without a review, effectively making the managerial review
optional. The OSPA was retired as of November 30, 2022; however, the replacement payroll system
operates in a similar manner for managerial review.
As part of our testing of payroll expenditures, we found one of 25 randomly selected timesheets were
not reviewed by a manager prior to release into the payroll system. We were able to perform
alternative procedures to verify the amounts charged to the program were appropriate and there are
no questioned costs.
The lack of review increases the risk that inappropriate costs may be charged to federal programs.
We recommend management ensure wireless device charges are properly reviewed, and expenditures
are charged to the correct cost center or program. We also recommend management implement
procedures to ensure all employee payroll submissions are reviewed and approved by program
management.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 74
The questioned costs related to cell phone charges appear to have resulted from a lack of for mal
process in the Coronavirus Response and Recovery Unit. This unit has closed and departments have
returned to standardized formal processes.
Corrective action plan:
• Prior to “COVID-19” processes and procedures will be followed
• Administrative staff will parse cell phone charges and code invoices according to employee
payroll
• Approving manager will review coding for accuracy prior to approval
Anticipated Completion Date: January 1, 2023
2022-053 Oregon Health Authority
Improve financial reporting accuracy
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious
Diseases (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 6 NU50CK000541, 2020 (COVID-19);
6 NU50CK000541, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirements: Reporting
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: 2021-022
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.328
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) awarded states
substantial funds for the purpose of addressing the pandemic at the state level. Among other
requirements, states are required to submit monthly financial reports to th e CDC providing totals spent
on travel, payroll, equipment, and other categories.
During the fiscal year 2021 audit, we reported a material weakness relating to the accuracy of the
amounts reported to the CDC. The same issue persisted throughout fiscal ye ar 2022. As of
June 30, 2022, the department had not taken the necessary actions to implement the prior
recommendations and had not fully corrected the reports submitted in fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
However, as of March 2023, the department had implemented the appropriate corrective actions and
the previously inaccurate reports have been updated, including the reports for fiscal year 2022. Audit
standards require that we report on the status as of June 30, 2022.
We recommend department management maintain the necessary internal controls to ensure the
monthly financial reports are accurate and agree to the accounting records.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 75
As you note in your audit letter, our financial reporting accuracy had been remedied for all historical
and current reports by March 2023. Unfortunately, these improvements were not in place by June 30,
2022 and, for that reason, a finding was noted.
Corrective action plan:
• All monthly financial reporting has been assigned to our Fiscal Analyst
• The Fiscal Analyst submits monthly financial reports and the query used to generate the
reports to the Office of Financial Services (OFS) for review and approval
• The Fiscal Analyst revises monthly financial reports based on OFS feedback
• Following OFS approval, monthly financial reports are entered into CAMP by an ELC
administrative staff member and verified by a second team member
Anticipated Completion Date:  March 31, 2023
2022-054 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve controls over payments for Medicaid clients
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.777 and 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  2105OR5MAP, 2021; 2105OR5ADM, 2021; 2205OR5MAP, 2022;
2205OR5ADM, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.1(1); 2 CFR 200.400(a); 2 CFR 200.404; 42 CFR § 433.32(a)
Federal regulations only allow the Medicaid program to charge allowable program expenditures at the
federal financial participation rate for various program costs at the time of payment for services
provided.
The Department of Human Services (department) and the Oregon Health Authority (authority) make
payments to service providers through the Jsystems system. We randomly sampled 61 clients and one
Medicaid service payment associated with each client using a statistically valid sample. We reviewed
agency documentation to test compliance with the Activities Allowed or Unallowed & Allowable Cost
requirements. For 1 client, we found the issues described below.
• The claim selected as our sample item did not have mileage accurately calculated, which
resulted in an overpayment. Further review of payments for this client identified additional
inaccurate payments during the fiscal year for mileage to this provider. Questioned costs
identified for our sample item resulted in an overpayment of $6.00 and other identified
questioned costs resulted in an underpayment of ($5.27).
The above issues occurred due to human error when entering mileage into the state payment syste m
from the home care worker mileage tracking software (OR-PTC), which lead to improper payments.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 76
Phase 1 of the OR-PTC system was implemented in September of 2021. During this phase of the
implementation branches must run a report of mileage claims and enter these claims manually into the
payment system. Due to the exceptions noted above, we reviewed all clients within our sample  for the
fiscal year which had mileage entered into the OR-PTC system and identified multiple additional
underpayments and overpayments that resulted in an overall underpayment of ($49.07). Due to the
systemic nature of this issue, we are unable to reasonably estimate or quantify remaining potential
questioned costs outside of our sample population.
We recommend department and authority management strengthen controls over the OR-PTC system
to ensure transactions are adequately supported and reviewed.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The department is engaged in ongoing efforts to mitigate this risk through con tinued communications
with local offices and their leadership around the importance of correct data entry and reviewing
changes to our KPI’s that we report quarterly to CMS.
Regional Readiness Coordinators (RRCs) provide training, reinforce best practices,  review business
processes, and provide feedback on issues we are seeing to reduce incidences of human error. The
department will also continue to review and research authorizations for Mileage and Time entries that
do not align with existing claims to determine where additional RRC support is needed.
Several system enhancements and changes slated for June 2023 are intended to help providers claim
time accurately and reduce local office workload associated with reviewing pending entries. This will
not fully resolve the issues noted by SOS, however, implementation of phase 2A of the Provider Time
Capture System, which is scheduled to go into production July 12, 2024, will eliminate the need for local
offices to manually enter mileage or hours into the mainframe payment systems and will automatically
flag discrepancies between OR PTC DCI and the Mainframe.
The department has corrected all identified issues discovered through the audit process.
Anticipated Completion Date: July 31, 2024
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 77
2022-055 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen review over direct costs charged to the program
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.777 and 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  2105OR5MAP, 2021; 2105OR5ADM, 2021; 2205OR5MAP, 2022;
2205OR5ADM, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  $47,942 (known)
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.1(1); 2 CFR 200.400(a); 2 CFR 200.404; 42 CFR § 433.32(a)
Federal regulations only allow the Medicaid program to charge allowable program expenditures at the
federal financial participation rate for various program costs at the time of payment for services
provided.
The Department of Human Services (department) and the Oregon Health Authority (authority) make
payments to vendors other than providers through the state’s accounting system. We judgmentally
selected payments to 28 vendors for our review. We identified the following 2 errors, which were not
identified during their review process, that resulted in improper payment of Medicaid expenditures:
• Payments to one vendor charged expenditures related to a specific project unrelated to
the Medicaid program, resulting in known federally funded questioned costs of $1,361.
• For one payment management was unable to provide a contract or support for bids
collected for the project charged to the Medicaid program, resulting in known federally
funded questioned costs of $46,581.
The above issues occurred due to human error and inadequate record maintenance which could lead to
unallowed activities/costs being charged to the Medicaid program.
We recommend department and authority management strengthen controls over review to ensure
transactions are adequately supported and reviewed. Additionally, we recommend the authority
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
ODHS Facilities Management Response for Finding #1: The Office of Facilities Management (OFM) is
committed to providing accurate coding for payments. Communications have been made with staff
responsible for coding invoices and the need to conduct thorough reviews to ensure coding is accurate
and charged to the appropriate funding source for the goods or services the agency is being invoiced
for. OFM will be communicating with the programs that provide coding to confirm that the inf ormation
provided appropriately aligns with the intended use of the funds. The department will review current
processes and forms to ensure there is sufficient detail to verify accuracy. Questioned costs of $1,361
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 78
in Federal Funds (and $2,722 in Total Funds) paid with invoice number VP815455, was corrected on
4/26/2023 with document BTCL1412.
ODHS, Aging and People with Disabilities (APD) Response for Finding #2: The department is committed
to storing and retaining supporting documentation for all authorized payments. The processes and
procedures on contract bidding and approval associated with payment authorization for 1915k services
and support are being reviewed and improvements such as central repositories are being explored.
Once analysis and improvements are complete, they will be documented and communicated to staff
within the department and to the Office of Financial Services for awareness. Additionally, as part of
succession plan development, the department will create intentional opportunities for k nowledge
transfer, shared document storage, and increased transparency amongst work teams, which will assist
with document location in the context of unexpected personnel changes.
The department will reimburse the federal agency for any unallowable costs.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2024
2022-056 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Return questioned costs related to 2019-014 audit finding
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.777 and 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  1805OR5MAP, 2018; 1805OR5ADM, 2018; 1905OR5MAP, 2019;
1905OR5ADM, 2019
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  2019-014
Questioned Costs:  $348,080 (known)
Criteria: 42 CFR 433.32(a); 42 CFR 433.312(a); 42 CFR 447.45(f)(1)(iv)
During our testing for the fiscal year 2019 we noted that the MMIS data tables did not agree to the
rates established by CMS for 2 procedures codes. Using incorrect rates resulted in an overpayment of
$348,080 to providers. This overpayment was first reported in the fiscal year-end June 30, 2019,
Secretary of State audit report number 2020-14, finding number 2019-014.
As of January 1, 2020, management updated the MMIS data tables to ensure all future provider
payments were made at the correct rate. Additionally, management updated control procedures to
ensure MMIS data tables are updated timely and accurately. However, as of May 1, 2023, the
overpayment to providers has not been collected, federal funds have not been returned, and the
planned repayment method has not been approved by CMS. Per authority management th ey plan to let
these overpayments run through their cost settlement process which would be an unusual method to
return federal funds.
We recommend authority management reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 79
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
As indicated in the report and as of January 1, 2020, authority management updated the MMIS data
tables to ensure all future provider payments were made at the correct rate. Additionally, authority
management updated control procedures to ensure MMIS data tables are updated timely and
accurately. The recoupment of funds paid for incorrect rates will be completed through the FFS cost
settlement process. We expect to have this completed on or before June 30, 2024. We will evaluate the
use of alternate recoupment processes in the event of future corrections.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2024
2022-057 Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve documentation for provider eligibility determinations and revalidations
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.777 and 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  2105OR5MAP, 2021; 2105OR5ADM, 2021; 2205OR5MAP, 2022;
2205OR5ADM, 2022
Compliance Requirement:  Special Tests and Provisions
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding:  2021-020
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 42 CFR 455.436; 42 CFR 455.102 to 455.107; 42 CFR 455.414
Provider eligibility requirements for the Medicaid program differ depending upon the type of services
provided; however, all providers are subject to specified database checks and are required to sign an
adherence to federal regulations agreement (agreement). Typically, the agreement includes disclosures
specifically required by federal regulations. Additionally, the federal regulations require that the Oregon
Health Authority (authority) and Department of Human Services (department) determine eligibility for
Medicaid providers and revalidate providers at least every five years by performing database checks to
ensure providers are still eligible to participate in the Medicaid program.
We selected a random sample of 62 providers in the Medicaid program with 32 providers enrolled by the
authority and 30 enrolled by the department. For 4 providers we found the issues described below.
• I-9 form for 1 department provider could not be located. This provider is not currently a
provider with the State and an updated I-9 will not be obtained. Based on our review of
other available support we were able to determine this to be an eligible provider during the
fiscal year.
• I-9 form for 1 department provider could not be located. The department has since
obtained a completed I-9 form.
• I-9 forms for 2 department providers did not include a review of minimum acceptable
documents to verify identity and employment authorization. The department is actively
working to obtain missing documentation and based on our review of other available
support we were able to determine these to be eligible providers during the fiscal year.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 80
The above issues occurred due to human error and inadequate record maintenance which could lead to
ineligible providers receiving Medicaid funding.
We recommend department management strengthen controls to ensure documentation supporting a
provider’s eligibility determination and revalidation is complete.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
ODDS Response: The department is committed to having completed I -9 forms on file for all Personal
Support Workers through our Fiscal Intermediary. The Provider Enrollment Unit now has a quality
assurance staff who will conduct spot checks of the FI work. This is in process now and reviews will
continue.
APD Response: The department is committed to having completed I-9 forms on file for all employees
and homecare workers. This expectation, as it relates to homecare workers, was reinforced by the
department at the Client Employment Program Annual Summit held on 3/28/23 and 3/29/23. This
Summit was attended by approximately 160 local office staff. Local office staff were instructed on how
to properly fill out the I-9 form and retention requirements. Staff were also reminded of resources
available to answer questions, including central office points of contact.
The department is also exploring short- and long-term solutions to mitigate this risk, including creating
a peer review process on business procedures across the state intended to assist in not only accuracy,
but knowledge transfer, developmental growth and mentoring opportunities. The department may also
explore system changes that would automatically validate the completion of tasks related to provider
enrollment and renewals, including the presence of required documentation.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 1, 2023
2022-058 Department of Human Services
Perform timely reconciliations of refinanced OR-Kids transactions
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 93.667 Social Services Block Grant
Federal Award Numbers and Years: 2101ORSOSR, 2021; 2201ORSOSR, 2022
Compliance Requirement: Period of Performance
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: $1,308,457 (likely)
Criteria: 42 USC 1397a(c); 45 CFR 75.386a(2); 45 CFR 96.30b(2)
According to federal requirements, to be eligible for federal funding, expenditures must be expended in
the fiscal year allotted or in the succeeding fiscal year (period of performance). Additionally, federal
post-closeout requirements stipulate the return of any funds due because of later refunds, corrections,
or other transactions. As part of the grant closeout process, block grants also require the grantees to
report the total funds expended and the date of the last expenditure. Grant closeout is the process by
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 81
which the federal awarding agency determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required
work have been completed.
Social Services Block Grant (SSBG) has expenditures originating from the child welfare system,
OR-Kids. OR-Kids is used to manage placements, eligibility, payments, and other case information.
When various corrections are initiated, OR-Kids can re-process transactions as far back as
January 1, 2008. For some placement corrections, OR-Kids processed the recovery of the funds in a
state grant (Miscellaneous Other Fund grant), instead of the federal grant. To date, the department has
not completed permanent fixes to the OR-Kids system to prevent these re-processing errors from
occurring.
During fiscal year 2022, the department was reconciling the Miscellaneous Other Fund grant and
identified refunds related to SSBG. The refinanced expenditures reduced the amount of SSBG
expenditures originally reported in closed grant awards. Instead of submitting a refund, the department
identified expenditures recorded in subsequent grants that could have been used to backfill the
reduction of expenditures. Allowable expenditures, that met the period of performance, were
subsequently moved. To illustrate, a total of $1.3 million of expenditures were moved in the accounting
system from grant award 21 (federal fiscal year 2021) to grant award 20. The department then moved
expenditures totaling $1.2 million from grant award 20 to grant award 19. This process continued for all
grant awards going back to grant award 11 (federal fiscal year 2011). The table below illustrates the
movement of expenditures between grant awards.
Although the department only moved expenditures that qualified for each respective period of
performance, we question whether the federal awarding agency would allow the department to backfill
the $1.3 million of expenditures in question after grant closeout had been completed .
We recommend department management conduct more timely reconciliations of OR -Kids refinancing
adjustments to ensure adjustments are made during the related periods of performance. We further
recommend management work with its federal awarding agency to determine if it is appropriate to
backfill program expenditures between grants to account for the reduction in expenditures created by
the reconciliation process. If not appropriate, the questioned costs should be repaid to the federal
awarding agency.
Grant
Award
Amount
Moved
Moved from
Grant Award
20 1,308,670.83  21
19 1,212,914.34  20
18 1,186,088.18  19
17 1,173,217.45  18
16 687,173.96     17
15 646,916.66     16
14 571,631.93     15
13 571,631.93     14
12 10,283.25        13
11 3,339.57          12
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 82
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
The agency disagrees with this finding.
SFMA grant phase is an internal tracking mechanism only and is not mandated by ACF. None of
the expenditures observed were moved into or out of the period of performance for which they
originally qualified for.
SSBG awards have a two-year period of performance for claiming. As a result, there is an overlap
between internal phases where expenditures qualify for two at any given tim e. Assignment of
phase in SFMA is based on internal balancing needs to ensure claiming is not over or under the
award for that period.
Prior period adjustments occur periodically and are debited or credited to the phase they were
originally recorded under. Should those adjustments cause a phase to become under or over reported,
the assigned phase in SFMA is adjusted to maintain consistency between SFMA expenditures and the
SF-425 report provided to ACF. If a prior period increasing expenditure is outside the period of
performance, it is moved to non-reportable and state only funding.
Anticipated Completion Date: N/A
2022-059 Department of Human Services
Ensure issued benefits are accurate
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Agriculture
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 10.542 Pandemic EBT Food Benefits (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years: Not available (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement: Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs: $3,692,215 (known); $13,554,666 (likely) (COVID-19)
Criteria: Public Law 116-127; 2 CFR 200.303
The federal requirements for the Pandemic EBT (P-EBT) program require state agencies follow their
approved state plan. Part of Oregon’s simplifying assumptions in their state plan was that the benefit
amount was determined at the school level, not the individual level, based on the school’s operating
status, for October 2020 – May 2021. As part of Oregon’s Ready Schools, Safe Learners program,
schools were required to weekly report their operating status/instructional model to the Oregon
Department of Education (ODE).
In fiscal year 2022, the Department of Human Services (department) paid retroactive P -EBT benefits
for children related to the 2020-2021 school year. This sample population consisted of institutions
(schools and other educational facilities) and months in which children at the institutions received
benefits, totaling $391 million. We selected a random sample of 40 institutions and a random month to
determine if the benefits provided to the children, based on the status reported by the institution,
were accurate. We identified 4 institutions, for April/May, where the benefit paid status of th e
institution was not the same as reported by the institution to ODE. In all 4 cases, the benefits paid were
at a higher level resulting in questioned costs of $38,931 and likely questioned costs of $9.2 million.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 83
One of the simplifying assumptions for the P-EBT program, approved in Oregon’s state plan, was
“Oregon will have a limited reconsideration process to revisit benefit allotments at a school level.”
However, the department allowed institutions to update their status without additional review,
explanation, or documentation. The department could not provide the auditors any support for the
changes made by the institutions.
Furthermore, the Oregon Governor issued a directive to schools, on March 5, 2021, to begin a phased
approach to require all public schools to provide in-person instruction through either a fully on-site or
hybrid model on or before the week of April 19, 2021, for all schools. Although benefits issued
continued to decrease as the school year end approached, in May 2021, 26% of the insti tution’s
benefits paid were for fully virtual totaling $17 million. We judgmentally selected 36 institutions
classified as fully virtual in May with benefits totaling $7.9 million. For 25 institutions, the benefit paid
status did not agree to the status reported by the institution to ODE resulting in questioned costs of
$3,653,284 and likely questioned costs of $4.4 million.
We recommend DHS perform review to identify any additional discrepancies between benefits paid
and the institutions reported status, to determine if payments were appropriate, and communicate
with the federal awarding agency to determine if repayment is necessary.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We respectfully disagree with the findings that schools were not able to directly update their  learning
mode according to the guidance provided in the P-EBT state plan.
The department has included emails and documents that support the actions/decisions taken in the
delivery of the Oregon P-EBT school year 2020-2021 state plan was in accordance with federal
approval from Food and Nutrition Service (FNS).
According to the USDA FNS approval letter received on May 7, 2021, and posted to the FNS website,
FNS confirms that Oregon will “develop(ed) a centralized database to collect student eligibility
information and school status” to determine the monthly benefit level for each school (6 th bullet on
page 2).
This information is also confirmed in email correspondence with FNS on April 29, 2021, and May 3, 2021.
Within the email the Department details that Oregon will develop a database to collect school status,
this is then confirmed by FNS.
As part of Oregon’s federally approved simplified assumptions, the state plan allows the school points
of contact to update their predominate learning model for each month of the 2020-2021 school year,
which may be different than the Ready Schools, Safe Learners (RSSL) Weekly Status Report.
An email communication was shared with all identified school points of contact on June 28, 2021. This
email requested that school points of contact update their schools predominate learning mode into the
Oregon School Meals Benefit (OSMB) system used by the Oregon Department of Human Services to
issue P-EBT benefits no later than July 13, 2021.
Information reported through the RSSL weekly status report was used to determine the predominate
learning mode only in the event that the school point of contract did not update a learning mode
manually within OSMB prior to July 13, 2021.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 84
On May 9, 2023, the P-EBT policy team confirmed school operating status during the selected months
with 5 schools for SOS audit. Email responses from the schools are summarized below:
School
ID School Name
Audit
Month/YR
Reported
Learning
Mode
Paid Learning
Mode
School confirmed
paid learning
mode: Y/N
162 Scappoose High April 2021 On-site Distance (CDL) Y – Distance (CDL)
97 Boring Middle March 2021 Hybrid Distance (CDL) Y – Distance (CDL)
474 Keno Elem April 2021 On-site Hybrid Y - Hybrid
1270 Sexton Mountain Elem April 2021 Hybrid Distance (CDL) N - Hybrid
At the recommendation of the auditors the Department has reached out to FNS Child Nutrition
Program about the finding and we are waiting for a response.
Anticipated completion date: N/A
2022-060 Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Strengthen controls to ensure expenditures are not obligated beyond the period of performance
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Labor
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 17.258 WIOA Adult Program
17.259 WIOA Youth Activities
17.278 WIOA Dislocated Workers Formula Grant
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  AA32218F30, 2018; AA32218G10, 2018; AA32218G30, 2018;
AA32218G70, 2018; AA32218H90, 2018; AA32218F31, 2018
Compliance Requirement:  Period of Performance
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  $47,523 (known)
Criteria: 20 CFR 683.110; 2 CFR 200.343 (2018)
WIOA grants are available for expenditure by the State during the grant program year and the two
succeeding program years. In addition, the State must liquidate all financial obligations incurred no later
than 90 calendar days after the end date of the period of performance.
We judgmentally selected for review expenditures recorded in fiscal year 2022 related to 2018 grant
award whose period of performance ended June 30, 2021. Our review of the supporting documentation
found there were 3 out of 13 items with expenditures that were outside the period of performance.
Total question cost for these expenditures were $47,523.
Per management, these errors were due to a change in personnel and trying to balance out the 2018
grant after the fact.
We recommend department management review and revise controls to ensure expenditures are only
obligated during the period of performance federally mandated dates.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 85
The three errors pertaining to those expenditures that were outside the p eriod of performance, were
due to a change in personnel and trying to balance out the 2018 grant, after the fact. The HECC have
addressed these issues by ensuring that all new accountants are fully trained in a timely manner. Also,
HECC has implemented training for all current accounting staff in identifying what is an allowable cost
within the period of performance. This training also included a review of proper close -out procedures
for all grants.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
2022-061 Higher Education Coordinating Commission
FFATA reports were not prepared or submitted
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Labor
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 17.258 WIOA Adult Program
17.259 WIOA Youth Activities
17.278 WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grant
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  AA33251LN0, 2019; AA33251L70, 2019; AA33251L90, 2019;
AA33251R70, 2019; AA33251R90, 2019; AA34789VS0, 2020;
AA34789V90, 2020; AA34789VQ0, 2020; AA347893L0; 2020;
AA347895P0, 2020; AA36341E10, 2021; AA36341D90, 2021;
AA36341DQ0, 2021; AA36341KY0, 2021; AA36341LA0, 2021
Compliance Requirement:  Reporting
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 170; 2 CFR 200.303
The WIOA Cluster is subject to subaward reporting under the Federal Funding Accountability and
Transparency Act (FFATA). FFATA requires the department to submit information for any subaward
action that equals or exceeds $30,000 in the FFATA Subaward Reporting System (FSRS). Reports
should be submitted no later than the end of the month following the month in which the subawards
were made. Federal regulations also require recipients of federal awards to establish and mainta in
internal controls designed to reasonably ensure compliance with federal laws, regulations, and program
compliance requirements.
Upon inquiry of the department, we determined it had not submitted any subaward information to the
FSRS during fiscal year 2022. Department management stated FFATA reporting was not completed due
to staff turnover. We also reviewed information the department had submitted at USAspending.gov
and determined the department had not submitted any subaward information to FSRS since 2 017.
The agency is not in compliance with FFATA reporting requirements. Additionally, the department is not
transparent in the spending decisions of these federal awards.
We recommend department management implement controls to timely prepare and submit the
monthly FFATA reports as required by federal regulations. The department should also work with the
federal awarding agency to determine what actions it should take for older reports  not submitted.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 86
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
According to the findings, the HECC didn’t submit any subaward information to the FSRS during fiscal
year 2022. Furthermore, the Department had not submitted any subaward information to FSRS since
2017. The HECC acknowledges these findings are correct. Due to these findings, HECC has implemented
procedures to ensure timely entry into the FFATA Subaward Reporting System (FSRS) of all awards
that equal or exceed $30,000. In addition, HECC has granted FSRS access to several high -level
accountants to ensure that there is always staff on hand to make these entries. The procedures include
a checkbox on the cover page of every agreement that delineates when a FSRS entry is required.
Anticipated Completion Date:  May 31, 2023
2022-062 Higher Education Coordinating Commission
Improve controls over payroll
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Labor
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 17.258 WIOA Adult Program
17.259 WIOA Youth Activities
17.278 WIOA Dislocated Workers Formula Grant
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  AA33251LN0, 2019; AA33251L70, 2019; AA33251L90, 2019;
AA33251R70, 2019; AA33251R90, 2019; AA34789VS0, 2020;
AA34789V90, 2020; AA34789VQ0, 2020; AA347893L0, 2020;
AA347895P0, 2020; AA36341E10, 2021; AA36341D90, 2021;
AA36341DQ0, 2021; AA36341KY0, 2021; AA36341LA0, 2021
Compliance Requirement:  Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303
Federal regulations require recipients of federal awards to establish and maintain internal controls
designed to reasonably ensure compliance with federal laws, regulations, and program compliance
requirements.
The department has implemented the following procedures to ensure payroll costs are correctly
charged to the program. Managers approve monthly timesheets submitted by the employees in the
state’s payroll system. When managers do not approve by a specified date, the payroll system will
automatically approve the timesheet, shown with the words “system approved.” Additionally, each
employee should have a signed position description, which details the duties of the position and the
amount of time to be charged for the duties.
We selected a nonstatistical random sample of 20 employee timesheets related to 12 employees to
ensure payroll was appropriately charged to the program. Additionally, we selected one employee who
was on job rotation with the agency from January 2022 through June 2022. We verified payroll
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 87
timesheets were reviewed by a manager and signed position descriptions were retained per state
guidelines, and identified the following exceptions:
• Two timesheets for one employee did not have evidence of manager approval and 2
timesheets for two employees were reviewed over three months later.
• For all 12 employees, the position descriptions provided were unsigned or signed upon our
request. We did not question these costs as department management verified job duties
were appropriate to the program.
• For the employee on job rotation, 4 of the 6 timesheets were not reviewed and a signed
position description was not signed by the employee.
According to department management, timesheets were not always approved by the manager as the
system will automatically lock and approve the timesheet. For position descriptions, supervisor did not
always follow through on obtaining signed position descriptions and for longer term employees a
number of boxes could not be located when the agency moved. There is a risk that employees could be
improperly charging to the federal program.
We recommend department management ensure timesheets are timely reviewed and positions
descriptions are completed and retained.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
To improve controls over payroll, the HECC and the State of Oregon switched its payroll system  from
the old Legacy Oregon State Payroll Application (OSPA – Epay) to the new Workday Payroll as of
December 1, 2022. The HECC has since created reminder emails to all Management Staff  to submit their
respective employees’ timesheets in a timely manner. In addition, the new  Workday Payroll does not
have a feature that automatically locks an employee’s timesheet and auto-approves a timesheet. Each
Manager must now manually approve a timesheet for any employee that enters specific time codes for
particular grants or use of funds. To address the finding regarding unsigned position descriptions (PDs),
the HECC has since ensured that all of the identified PDs have been signed. HECC’s Human Resources
Unit (HR) has created a new process going forward requiring all managers to sign the PD at the time of
the offer letter and HECC HR to collect the signature from the employee on their first day when HR
meets with them. HECC HR also has reviewed all of its existing employees’ position description in this
process to ensure all positions descriptions are signed.
Anticipated Completion Date: August 31, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 88
2022-063 Oregon Department of Transportation
Consistency needed when providing required federal award information to subrecipients
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Transportation
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 20.205 Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
Federal Award Numbers and Years: Various
Compliance Requirements: Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding: Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding: N/A
Questioned Costs: N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.332(a)(1)
Federal regulations require pass-through entities to ensure every subaward is clearly identified to the
subrecipient as a subaward and includes certain required information.
We examined 17 subrecipient awards to ensure the information required under 2 CFR 200.332(a)(1) was
communicated at the time of the subaward. Each award examined was missing one or more of the
required elements:
• 15 samples did not include the subrecipient’s Unique Entity Identifier or DUNS number;
• 7 samples did not provide the Federal Award Identification Number (FAIN);
• 5 samples did not provide the Federal Award date; and
• 1 sample did not provide the correct assistance listing number.
The required award information is necessary for the subrecipient to accurately report the subaward
information in its accounting records and on the schedule of expenditure of federal awards.
Procedures to communicate award information are not consistently followed across the department
and as a result do not ensure that all the required award information is communicated.  Specifically,
some required information is included in the Federal Project Agreement from the Federal Management
Information System (FMIS), but not all managers were aware it needed to be provided. In many cases
an exhibit was included with the agreement that could have provided all the required information, but
the exhibit was not completed.
We recommend the department adopt procedures for preparing subaward agreements that ensure all
required information is provided to subrecipients at the time of the subaward.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department will implement the following:
1. Communicate to all Program Managers of federal funds the requirements of sending the FMIS
document to the sub-recipient. The FMIS document includes the FAIN, Award Date and starting
6/1/23 will also include the UEI.
2. Procurement will ensure the exhibit included with the agreement is completed and returned by
the subrecipient.
3. Identify a staff person to enter data into the FFATA Subaward Reporting System (FSRS).
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 89
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
2022-064 Oregon Department of Transportation
Management should ensure timely review of transfers is documented
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Transportation
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 20.205 Highway Planning and Construction
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  Various
Compliance Requirement:  Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.303; GAO-17-704G ¶10.03, 12.05; ODOT FASM 3.7
The department is responsible for establishing and maintaining internal controls to ensure entries
posted in the accounting records are for costs and activities allowable under the federal p rogram.
Journal entry review and approval should be clearly documented and readily available for examination.
The department has established Financial Administration Standard 3.7, Expenditure Journal Entries,
which requires management to transmit signed hard copy supporting documentation of journal entries
to financial services after they’ve been reviewed and approved.
We tested 40 transfer journal entries moving costs between federal project sub jobs and found that 19
did not have documentation of timely approval. In two cases, approval was documented more than a
year after costs were transferred. The 19 entries were all lump sum transfers processed by Program
and Funding Services (P&FS).
P&FS is authorized to process transfers, moving costs between sub jobs of the same project. These
transfers are necessary to align project costs with the appropriate funding source.  Per P&FS
management, transfers are generally reviewed within a few days. However, documentation of the
review has not been occurring until much later due to challenges associated with remote work and
policies requiring hard copy documentation.
Over $90 million in program costs were transferred between sub jobs in this ma nner during fiscal year
2022. Without timely review and documentation available to support transfers, unallowable costs or
activities could be transferred and billed erroneously to the Federal government.
We recommend management ensure procedures for review of transfer journal entries result in timely
documented approvals.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
Until electronic signatures are implemented, a Federal Aid Funding staff member will be required to
print the hard copies, in the office at least monthly; as well as a member of the Statewide Investments
Section management team will need to be present to sign the hard copies.
Anticipated Completion Date: May 4, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 90
2022-065 Oregon Department of Education
State did not meet maintenance of effort requirement
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Education
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 84.425C, 84.425D, 84.425R, 84.425U & 84.425W
Education Stabilization Fund (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  S425C210048, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425D210049, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425R210047, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425U210049, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425W210038, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement:  Matching, Level of Effort, Earmarking
Type of Finding:  Material Weakness; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: Section 18008 of Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations (CRRSA) Act;
Section 2004(a) of the American Rescue Plan (ARP) Act; 2 CFR 200.303
The CRRSA and the ARP acts require the State to maintain support for both elementary and secondary
education and for higher education in fiscal year 2022 at least at the proportional level of the state’s
support for elementary and secondary education and for higher education relative to the state’s overall
spending, averaged over fiscal years 2017, 2018 and 2019.
The Department of Education did not meet the maintenance of effort provisions for fiscal year 2022 for
elementary and secondary education. Although the state’s overall funding increased for education its
proportional level relative to Oregon’s overall spending declined. The department is reliant on the
legislative budget process. The department was in contact with the federal awarding agency about the
maintenance of effort issue. The department submitted a waiver request to the U.S. Department of
Education dated March 29, 2023.
According to department management, budget changes and obtaining a clearer understanding of the
other fund amount delayed the calculation for maintenance of effort.
If the waiver is not approved, the department may be asked to return some of the funds. The total
federal expenditures for the Education Stabilization Fund program for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2022 were $426 million.
We recommend department management continue to actively track whether it will meet the
maintenance of effort requirement and work with the federal awarding agency.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
The Department of Education agrees with this finding; however, context is critical to understand this
requirement. The Maintenance of Effort (MOE) requirements in The ARP ESSER III legislation are unique.
The purpose of the requirement is to ensure that states are not moving the federal pandemic funds in
to replace state funding and then leaving districts with a more substantial “fiscal cliff” when the
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 91
pandemic funds recede. ODE administers state funding to Oregon districts, but the levels and formulas
governing the distribution of the funds are determined by the Oregon Legislature and not ODE. State
School and the Student Success Act’s Student Investment Account funding and other funding
corrections are via complex statutory formulas intended to ensure equity of funding across the state.
ODE has worked very closely with our USED partners regarding the delay in our access to data and
while preparing the Maintenance of Effort waiver request to USED. While ODE acknowledges the state
did not meet MOE, ODE has made every good faith effort within in its power and authorities to
communicate the reasons for lack of compliance to USED and timely applied for a waiver.
ODE, along with other SEAs, now has a deeper understanding of the  funding and methodology
requirements of MOE under ARP ESSER and will be able to assess compliance for 2023 much more
quickly, but only after the final 2023 data is completed. Since that data completion will not  be until
January 2024, ODE will likely still be contemplating whether or not to pursue an MOE waiver with USED
early in 2024. ODE is committed to continue to work closely with our USED partners to achieve
compliance or appropriately request a waiver.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2024
2022-066 Oregon Department of Education
Improve subrecipient monitoring procedures
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Education
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 84.425C, 84.425D, 84.425U & 84.425W Education Stabilization
Fund (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  S425C200048, 2020 (COVID-19);
S425D200049, 2020 (COVID-19);
S425C210048, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425D210049, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425U210049, 2021 (COVID-19);
S425W210038, 2021 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement:  Subrecipient Monitoring
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.332
Federal regulations require the department to evaluate each subrecipients risk of noncompliance with
Federal statues, regulations, and the terms and conditions of the subaward for purposes of determining
the appropriate monitoring to perform. In addition, the department should monitor the activities of the
subrecipients receiving funds to ensure the subaward is used for authorized purposes, is in compliance
with Federal statutes, regulations, and the terms and condition of the subaward; and the subaward
performance goals are achieved. Depending on the department risk assessment, which was not
performed, the department could perform various monitoring tools to ensure accountability and
compliance.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 92
As of June 30, 2022, the department was still in the process of drafting and implementing a plan to
monitor the funds. The department had not completed a risk assessment process of the local
educational agencies (LEA) for these funds and stated it planned to begin some desk or on -site
monitoring in Spring 2023. $522 million in funds have been passed through to subrecipients as of
June 30, 2022.
The department required LEA’s to submit applications to receive funds and sign agreements that
outlined all federal requirements. In addition, the department also required the LEA’s to complete a
reimbursement request form that contains general ledger detail but no additional support is provided.
According to the department, it follows-up with a LEA if funds appear to be ineligible or other
questions are raised. Finally, although LEAs programs may have had a single audit the department
could not provide a list of which LEAs had audits and whether there were findings or not.
In fiscal year 2021, the department was also working to finalize its risk assessment and monitoring
plans. However, the department experienced staff turnover which delayed its plans. Insufficient
subrecipient monitoring increases the risk of not timely identifying subrecipients that are not
administering federal awards in compliance with federal requirements.
We recommend department management complete its risk assessment, consider the results of LEAs
single audits and perform desk or on-site monitoring as necessary.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
ODE acknowledges that it did not implement pandemic funding related desk audit and site monitoring
procedures in FY 21. FY 21 saw the COVID-19 Delta and Omicron variants continue to infect school staff
and students so on-site visits were not feasible. The pandemic also forced districts to dedicate
administrator time and attention to student health and safety and adjusting to the ever-changing
health environment, guidance and requirements. In anticipation of such challenges during the pandemic,
ODE set up the ESSER reimbursements to districts allows for much more detailed reporting when
requesting reimbursement to allow ODE to track how districts were spending their funds. While not
traditional monitoring, it was an effective, efficient, and creative way to ensure ODE spending oversight
in unprecedented times.
As discussed with Secretary of State auditors, ODE finalized and implemented a  risk assessment tool in
the spring of 2023 and has completed an initial set of ten monitoring desk reviews  with districts.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2024
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 93
2022-067 Oregon Department of Education
Ensure accuracy of federal reporting
Federal Awarding Agency: U.S. Department of Education
Assistance Listing Number and Name: 84.425C Education Stabilization Fund (COVID-19)
Federal Award Numbers and Years:  S425C200048, 2020 (COVID-19)
Compliance Requirement:  Reporting
Type of Finding:  Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Prior Year Finding:  N/A
Questioned Costs:  N/A
Criteria: 2 CFR 200.302(b); 2 CFR 200.303(a)
Federal regulations require that federal reports include all activity of the reporting period and be
supported by applicable accounting records. Federal regulations also require that the department file a
separate report for the Governor’s Emergency Education Relief (GEER) expenditures for the period
ending June 30, 2021.
The department reported GEER information for the local education areas (LEAs) related to the
comprehensive distance learning grant program. LEAs submit reimbursement to the department  and
this information is tracked in an excel database. The database includes various information, includin g
funding types, dates, and amounts. During FY 2022, the department completed the reports using the
database, but incorrectly filtered the data so some expenditures were not captured. This resulted in an
underreporting of GEER expenditures by $13.9 million.
We recommend department management ensure that accurate expenditure data is submitted to the
federal government for federal reporting.
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE:
We agree with this recommendation.
ODE has noted the mistake in data filtering and will remedy to ensure accurate expenditure reporting
this year. Annual reporting for GEER will enable this error to be corrected moving  forward.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 22, 2023
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | July 2023 | page 94
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of
Federal Awards
For the Year Ended
June 30, 2022
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 95 -
Department of Agriculture
10.001 Agricultural Research Basic and Applied Research
$  -  $ 99,315  $ 99,315
10.025 Plant and Animal Disease, Pest Control, and Animal Care
99,992    2,780,856
Pass Through from: Oregon State University 4575900000000       2,912
Total 10.025
2,883,760
10.069 Conservation Reserve Program
55,914   -   55,914
10.093 Voluntary Public Access and Habitat Incentive Program
-   538,411   538,411
10.156 Federal-State Marketing Improvement Program
88,302   -   88,302
10.170 Specialty Crop Block Grant Program - Farm Bill
1,973,135   835,311    2,808,446
10.171 Organic Certification Cost Share Programs
-   104,698   104,698
10.290 Agricultural Market and Economic Research
-   -
Pass Through from: University of Idaho 1826000945000        104
Total 10.290
10.309 Specialty Crop Research Initiative
-   -
Pass Through from: Oregon State University 4575900000000       14,943
Total 10.309
14,943
10.525 Farm and Ranch Stress Assistance Network Competitive Grants Program
86,175   -   86,175
10.542 COVID-19 Pandemic EBT Food Benefits
-    568,371,920    568,371,920
10.545 Farmers' Market Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Support Grants
-   24,062   24,062
10.557 COVID-19 WIC Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants,
and Children
-    2,999,542
10.557 WIC Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
18,870,364    42,304,138
Total 10.557       64,174,044
10.558 Child and Adult Care Food Program
26,221,028   605,558    26,826,586
10.560 State Administrative Expenses for Child Nutrition
-    3,065,336    3,065,336
10.576 Senior Farmers Market Nutrition Program
-   989,590   989,590
10.578 WIC Grants to States (WGS)
-    4,222,808    4,222,808
10.582 Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program
2,275,090   23,164    2,298,254
10.649 COVID-19 Pandemic EBT Administrative Costs
607,686    4,014,588    4,622,274
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 96 -
10.664 Cooperative Forestry Assistance
287,254    4,879,386    5,166,640
10.674 Wood Utilization Assistance
-   100,338   100,338
10.675 Urban and Community Forestry Program
-   5,919   5,919
10.676 Forest Legacy Program
-    3,586,303    3,586,303
10.678 Forest Stewardship Program
-   26,450   26,450
10.680 Forest Health Protection
-   626,430   626,430
10.691 Good Neighbor Authority
-    1,110,227    1,110,227
10.697 State & Private Forestry Hazardous Fuel Reduction Program
-   610,059   610,059
10.868 Rural Energy for America Program
-   18,580   18,580
10.902 Soil and Water Conservation
-    1,187,123
Pass Through from: American Forest Foundation 1521235124000       173,990
Total 10.902
1,361,113
10.912 Environmental Quality Incentives Program
29,755   128,527   158,282
10.U01 20GN11061800033
-   17,521   17,521
10.U02 NR200436XXXXC008
-   231,321   231,321
SNAP Cluster
10.551 COVID-19 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
$  -  $  682,838,538  $
10.551 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
-   1,436,609,670
Total 10.551       2,119,448,208
10.561 COVID-19 State Administrative Matching Grants for the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program
-    6,644,569
10.561 State Administrative Matching Grants for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program
8,480,372    148,152,705
Total 10.561       163,277,646
Total SNAP Cluster
$ 8,480,372  $ 2,274,245,482  $ 2,282,725,854
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 97 -
Child Nutrition Cluster
10.553 School Breakfast Program
$ 56,598,208  $ 314,857  $  56,913,065
10.555 National School Lunch Program
221,273,355   735,767    222,009,122
10.556 Special Milk Program for Children
37,297   -   37,297
10.559 Summer Food Service Program for Children
8,817,594    1,223,624    10,041,218
10.579 Child Nutrition Discretionary Grants Limited Availability
325,563   11,353   336,916
Total Child Nutrition Cluster
$ 287,052,017  $  2,285,601  $  289,337,618
Food Distribution Cluster
10.565 COVID-19 Commodity Supplemental Food Program
$  8,371  $ -  $
10.565 Commodity Supplemental Food Program
722,421   -
Total 10.565       730,792
10.568 COVID-19 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Administrative Costs)
1,518,554   -
10.568 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Administrative Costs)
968,724   -
Total 10.568       2,487,278
10.569 COVID-19 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Food Commodities)
6,197,744   -
10.569 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Food Commodities)
11,894,367   -
Total 10.569       18,092,111
Total Food Distribution Cluster
$ 21,310,181  $ -  $  21,310,181
Total Department of Agriculture
$ 367,437,265  $ 2,920,230,513  $ 3,287,667,778
Department of Commerce
11.012 Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS)
$  -  $ -  $  -
Pass Through from: University of Washington 7000000000000    84,035
Pass Through from: University of Washington 1916001537       71,419
Total 11.012
155,454
11.407 Interjurisdictional Fisheries Act of 1986
-   55,358
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       229,190
Total 11.407
284,548
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 98 -
11.419 Coastal Zone Management Administration Awards
42,000    2,017,792
Pass Through from: University of Oregon 1464727800000       7,779
Total 11.419
2,067,571
11.420 Coastal Zone Management Estuarine Research Reserves
-   874,192   874,192
11.427 Fisheries Development and Utilization Research and Development Grants and
Cooperative Agreements Program
-   123,933   123,933
11.436 Columbia River Fisheries Development Program
-    7,570,720
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       60,357
Total 11.436
7,631,077
11.437 Pacific Fisheries Data Program
-   321,356
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376        1,243,821
Total 11.437
1,565,177
11.438 Pacific Coast Salmon Recovery Pacific Salmon Treaty Program
3,115,009    7,260,398    10,375,407
11.439 Marine Mammal Data Program
-   34,055
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       140,900
Total 11.439
174,955
11.441 Regional Fishery Management Councils
-   36,725
Pass Through from: North Pacific Fishery Mgmt Con 920060367    53,226
Pass Through from: Pacific Fishery Mgmt Council 910982918       194,983
Total 11.441
284,934
11.467 Meteorologic and Hydrologic Modernization Development
-   465,285   465,285
11.472 Unallied Science Program
-   136,021   136,021
11.473 Office for Coastal Management
-   26,912   26,912
11.478 Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research Coastal Ocean Program
-   103,850   103,850
11.999 Marine Debris Program
-   65,211   65,211
Total Department of Commerce
$ 3,157,009  $  21,177,518  $  24,334,527
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 99 -
Department of Defense
12.106 Flood Control Projects
$  3,748  $ 33,353  $ 37,101
12.113 State Memorandum of Agreement Program for the Reimbursement of Technical
Services
-   30,914   30,914
12.400 Military Construction, National Guard
-    14,413,827    14,413,827
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Projects
-    51,928,133    51,928,133
12.404 National Guard ChalleNGe Program
-    6,270,932    6,270,932
12.610 Community Economic Adjustment Assistance for Compatible Use and Joint Land
Use Studies
-   28,766   28,766
12.U01 21130P
-    (54,826)
Pass Through from: Pacific Marine Fish Com 910982918       234,438
Total 12.U01
179,612
12.U02 21181P
-   14,670   14,670
12.U03 W9127N14200090005
-    315    315
12.U04 W9127N20P0149
-   654,525   654,525
12.U05 W9127N21P0130
-   11,221   11,221
Total Department of Defense
$  3,748  $  73,566,268  $  73,570,016
Department of Housing and Urban Development
14.228 COVID-19 Community Development Block Grants/State's program and Non-
Entitlement Grants in Hawaii
$ 1,302,770  $ 163,266  $
14.228 Community Development Block Grants/State's program and Non-Entitlement
Grants in Hawaii
12,348,985   227,314
Total 14.228       14,042,335
14.231 COVID-19 Emergency Solutions Grant Program
33,499,653    1,558,170
14.231 Emergency Solutions Grant Program
1,620,450   79,910
Total 14.231       36,758,183
14.239 Home Investment Partnerships Program
1,485,033    7,399,667    8,884,700
14.241 COVID-19 Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
94,155   17,650
14.241 Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
278,260    1,136,080
Total 14.241       1,526,145
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 100 -
14.256 ARRA - Neighborhood Stabilization Program
-   12,142   12,142
14.267 Continuum of Care Program
-   29,392   29,392
14.275 Housing Trust Fund
-    1,370,515    1,370,515
14.326 Project Rental Assistance Demonstration (PRA Demo) Program of Section 811
Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities
-   120,645   120,645
14.400 Equal Opportunity in Housing
-    323    323
14.U01 B08DN410001
-   14,491   14,491
Total Department of Housing and Urban Development
$ 50,629,306  $  12,129,565  $  62,758,871
Department of the Interior
15.035 Forestry on Indian Lands
$  -  $ 25,779  $ 25,779
15.214 Non-Sale Disposals of Mineral Material
149,702   -   149,702
15.223 Recreation and Visitor Services
15,041   328,426   343,467
15.227 Distribution of Receipts to State and Local Governments
139,715   -   139,715
15.228 BLM Wildland Urban Interface Community Fire Assistance
-   247,466   247,466
15.230 Invasive and Noxious Plant Management
-   335,013   335,013
15.231 Fish, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Resource Management
-   71,952   71,952
15.233 Forests and Woodlands Resource Management
-   5,575   5,575
15.234 Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination
-   18,288
Pass Through from: Josephine County 1936002300       87,507
Total 15.234
105,795
15.244 Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management
802,596   220,985    1,023,581
15.245 Plant Conservation and Restoration Management
-   73,723   73,723
15.246 Threatened and Endangered Species
-   71,162   71,162
15.247 Wildlife Resource Management
-   914,187   914,187
15.504 Title XVI Water Reclamation and Reuse
-   90,588   90,588
15.608 Fish and Wildlife Management Assistance
-   11,000   11,000
15.614 Coastal Wetlands Planning, Protection and Restoration
50,225   979,882    1,030,107
15.615 Cooperative Endangered Species Conservation Fund
-    1,297,602    1,297,602
15.616 Clean Vessel Act
122,257   57,915   180,172
15.622 Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act
200,000   -   200,000
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 101 -
15.634 State Wildlife Grants
-    1,658,590
Pass Through from: Center for Natural Lands Mgmt 680233573       10,280
Total 15.634
1,668,870
15.653 National Outreach and Communication
-   -
Pass Through from: RBFF 541915490       24,750
Total 15.653
24,750
15.657 Endangered Species Conservation - Recovery Implementation Funds
-    1,043,348    1,043,348
15.661 Lower Snake River Compensation Plan
-    4,489,645    4,489,645
15.666 Endangered Species Conservation-Wolf Livestock Loss Compensation and
Prevention
77,213   -   77,213
15.670 Adaptive Science
-   79,946   79,946
15.684 White-nose Syndrome National Response Implementation
-   51,784   51,784
15.808 U.S. Geological Survey Research and Data Collection
-   84,970   84,970
15.810 National Cooperative Geologic Mapping
-   70,875   70,875
15.817 National Geospatial Program: Building The National Map
-   215,934   215,934
15.904 Historic Preservation Fund Grants-In-Aid
423,364   840,481    1,263,845
15.916 Outdoor Recreation Acquisition, Development and Planning
971,784   140,467    1,112,251
15.U01 F19AC00282
-   32,815   32,815
15.U02 FHWA110120 001275
-   60,879   60,879
15.U03 L09AC16024L21AC10174
-   4,500   4,500
15.U04 L21AC1044800
-   79,986   79,986
15.U05 ODOT 30952
-   14,080   14,080
15.U06 R18AP00012
-   212,126   212,126
15.U07 R18AP00041
-   1,310   1,310
15.U08 R20AP00308
-    58    58
Fish and Wildlife Cluster
15.605 Sport Fish Restoration
$  391,650  $  7,478,672  $  7,870,322
15.611 Wildlife Restoration and Basic Hunter Education
-    19,486,014    19,486,014
15.626 Enhanced Hunter Education and Safety
11,914   10,684   22,598
Total Fish and Wildlife Cluster
$  403,564  $  26,975,370  $  27,378,934
Total Department of the Interior
$ 3,355,461  $  40,929,244  $  44,284,705
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 102 -
Department of Justice
16.017 Sexual Assault Services Formula Program
$  366,896  $ 17,473  $ 384,369
16.034 COVID-19 Coronavirus Emergency Supplemental Funding Program
21,975   105,763   127,738
16.320 Services for Trafficking Victims
70,038   247,038   317,076
16.540 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
166,891   171,695   338,586
16.543 Missing Children's Assistance
-   572,942   572,942
16.550 State Justice Statistics Program for Statistical Analysis Centers
-   96,026   96,026
16.575 Crime Victim Assistance
26,535,666    1,431,985    27,967,651
16.576 Crime Victim Compensation
-    1,096,737    1,096,737
16.582 Crime Victim Assistance/Discretionary Grants
30,378   12,620
Pass Through from: Natl Assoc Voca Asst Administr 1682        363
Total 16.582
43,361
16.585 Drug Court Discretionary Grant Program
-   380,522
Pass Through from: Harney County 1023    13,031
Pass Through from: Josephine County 1018    38,152
Pass Through from: Union County 1011       9,496
Total 16.585
441,201
16.588 Violence Against Women Formula Grants
1,500,158   297,437    1,797,595
16.590 Grants to Encourage Arrest Policies and Enforcement of Protection Orders
Program
-   -
Pass Through from: Clackamas Women's Services 1045       80,159
Total 16.590
80,159
16.595 Community Capacity Development Office
-   109,082   109,082
16.710 Public Safety Partnership and Community Policing Grants
-   87,483   87,483
16.735 PREA Program: Strategic Support for PREA Implementation
-   95,701   95,701
16.738 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program
1,178,241   651,260    1,829,501
16.741 DNA Backlog Reduction Program
-   649,052   649,052
16.742 Paul Coverdell Forensic Sciences Improvement Grant Program
-   17,355   17,355
16.750 Support for Adam Walsh Act Implementation Grant Program
-   161,099   161,099
16.754 Harold Rogers Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
-   676,725   676,725
16.813 NICS Act Record Improvement Program
-   710,880   710,880
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 103 -
16.816 John R. Justice Prosecutors and Defenders Incentive Act
-   3,295   3,295
16.827 Justice Reinvestment Initiative
-   8,122
Pass Through from: OHA 1273327978 008       91,110
Total 16.827
99,232
16.831 Children of Incarcerated Parents
-   226,353   226,353
16.922 Equitable Sharing Program
-    69    69
Total Department of Justice
$ 29,870,243  $  8,059,025  $  37,929,268
Department of Labor
17.002 Labor Force Statistics
$  -  $  1,293,617  $  1,293,617
17.005 Compensation and Working Conditions
71   175,780   175,851
17.225 ARRA - Unemployment Insurance
-    7,425,098
17.225 COVID-19 Unemployment Insurance
-    938,368,688
17.225 Unemployment Insurance
-    618,894,093
Total 17.225       1,564,687,879
17.235 Senior Community Service Employment Program
947,504   37,680   985,184
17.245 Trade Adjustment Assistance
-    14,280,206    14,280,206
17.268 H-1B Job Training Grants
125,996   86,360   212,356
17.271 Work Opportunity Tax Credit Program (WOTC)
-   277,812   277,812
17.273 Temporary Labor Certification for Foreign Workers
-   422,283   422,283
17.277 WIOA National Dislocated Worker Grants / WIA National Emergency Grants
6,552,145   44,023
Pass Through from: Chemeketa Community College 13000       874,503
Total 17.277
7,470,671
17.285 Apprenticeship USA Grants
711,183   115,879   827,062
17.503 Occupational Safety and Health State Program
-    7,628,717    7,628,717
17.700 Women's Bureau
261,537   14,941   276,478
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 104 -
Employment Service Cluster
17.207 Employment Service/Wagner-Peyser Funded Activities
$  -  $  20,588,414  $  20,588,414
17.801 Disabled Veterans' Outreach Program (DVOP)
-    3,247,725    3,247,725
Total Employment Service Cluster
$  -  $  23,836,139  $  23,836,139
WIOA Cluster
17.258 WIOA Adult Program
$ 10,375,462  $ 498,456  $
Pass Through from: Worksystems Inc 37000        1,094,672
Total 17.258
11,968,590
17.259 WIOA Youth Activities
10,253,928   449,911    10,703,839
17.278 WIOA Dislocated Worker Formula Grants
9,646,575    2,586,427
Pass Through from: Worksystems Inc 37000       591,186
Total 17.278
12,824,188
Total WIOA Cluster
$ 30,275,965  $  5,220,652  $  35,496,617
Total Department of Labor
$ 38,874,401  $ 1,618,996,471  $ 1,657,870,872
Department of Transportation
20.106 Airport Improvement Program
$  -  $  2,109,640  $  2,109,640
20.200 Highway Research and Development Program
149,900   -   149,900
20.301 Railroad Safety
-   34,828   34,828
20.319 ARRA - High-Speed Rail Corridors and Intercity Passenger Rail Service - Capital
Assistance Grants
2,781   48,513   51,294
20.505 Metropolitan Transportation Planning and State and Non-Metropolitan Planning
and Research
23,831   -   23,831
20.509 COVID-19 Formula Grants for Rural Areas and Tribal Transit Program
9,386,632    1,123,570
20.509 Formula Grants for Rural Areas and Tribal Transit Program
11,300,769    1,909,175
Total 20.509       23,720,146
20.528 Rail Fixed Guideway Public Transportation System State Safety Oversight
Formula Grant Program
-   21,385   21,385
20.608 Minimum Penalties for Repeat Offenders for Driving While Intoxicated
152,662   388,140   540,802
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 105 -
20.614 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Discretionary Safety
Grants and Cooperative Agreements
-   52,857   52,857
20.700 Pipeline Safety Program State Base Grant
-   545,632   545,632
20.703 Interagency Hazardous Materials Public Sector Training and Planning Grants
127,683   142,445   270,128
Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
20.205 COVID-19 Highway Planning and Construction
$  -  $  123,980,570  $
20.205 Highway Planning and Construction
40,889,255    468,900,617
Pass Through from: Oregon State University 1611730890 4       5,511
Total 20.205
633,775,953
20.219 Recreational Trails Program
685,225   106,895   792,120
20.224 Federal Lands Access Program
-   38,405   38,405
Total Highway Planning and Construction Cluster
$ 41,574,480  $  593,031,998  $  634,606,478
Federal Transit Cluster
20.526 Bus and Bus Facilities Formula Program
$ 4,610,057  $ -  $  4,610,057
Total Federal Transit Cluster
$ 4,610,057  $ -  $  4,610,057
FMCSA Cluster
20.218 National Motor Carrier Safety Assistance
$  -  $  4,049,326  $  4,049,326
Total FMCSA Cluster
$  -  $  4,049,326  $  4,049,326
Highway Safety Cluster
20.600 State and Community Highway Safety
$ 1,097,610  $  1,598,897  $  2,696,507
20.611 Incentive Grant Program to Prohibit Racial Profiling
-   198,648   198,648
20.616 National Priority Safety Programs
1,747,065    1,332,084    3,079,149
Total Highway Safety Cluster
$ 2,844,675  $  3,129,629  $  5,974,304
Transit Services Programs Cluster
20.513 Enhanced Mobility of Seniors and Individuals with Disabilities
$ 13,011,183  $  1,221,582  $  14,232,765
Total Transit Services Programs Cluster
$ 13,011,183  $  1,221,582  $  14,232,765
Total Department of Transportation
$ 83,184,653  $  607,808,720  $  690,993,373
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 106 -
Department of the Treasury
21.019 COVID-19 Coronavirus Relief Fund
$ 7,088,154  $  124,996,112  $  132,084,266
21.023 COVID-19 Emergency Rental Assistance Program
139,706,506    201,294,594    341,001,100
21.026 COVID-19 Homeowner Assistance Fund
4,000    3,073,090    3,077,090
21.027 COVID-19 Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds
176,801,757    644,264,743    821,066,500
21.U01 ASSET FORFEITURE
-   7,469   7,469
Total Department of the Treasury
$ 323,600,417  $  973,636,008  $ 1,297,236,425
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
30.001 Employment Discrimination Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
$  -  $ 597,875  $ 597,875
Total Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
$  -  $ 597,875  $ 597,875
General Services Administration
39.002 Disposal of Federal Surplus Real Property
$  74,195  $ -  $ 74,195
39.003 Donation of Federal Surplus Personal Property
1,028,491   415,013    1,443,504
Total General Services Administration
$ 1,102,686  $ 415,013  $  1,517,699
National Endowment for the Arts
45.025 COVID-19 Promotion of the Arts Partnership Agreements
$  650,771  $ 65,000  $
45.025 Promotion of the Arts Partnership Agreements
751,586   40,036
Total 45.025       1,507,393
Total National Endowment for the Arts
$ 1,402,357  $ 105,036  $  1,507,393
Institute Of Museum and Library Services
45.310 COVID-19 Grants to States
$ 1,491,373  $ 87,061  $
45.310 Grants to States
905,319    1,655,034
Total 45.310       4,138,787
Total Institute Of Museum and Library Services
$ 2,396,692  $  1,742,095  $  4,138,787
Small Business Administration
59.061 State Trade Expansion
$  439,680  $ 157,629  $ 597,309
Total Small Business Administration
$  439,680  $ 157,629  $ 597,309
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 107 -
Department of Veterans Affairs
64.015 COVID-19 Veterans State Nursing Home Care
$  -  $  2,837,047  $
64.015 Veterans State Nursing Home Care
-    23,077,106
Total 64.015       25,914,153
64.035 Veterans Transportation Program
396,653   12,484   409,137
Total Department of Veterans Affairs
$  396,653  $  25,926,637  $  26,323,290
Environmental Protection Agency
66.032 State Indoor Radon Grants
$  -  $ 50,251  $ 50,251
66.034 Surveys, Studies, Research, Investigations, Demonstrations, and Special Purpose
Activities Relating to the Clean Air Act
138,026   723,386   861,412
66.040 State Clean Diesel Grant Program
-   595,029   595,029
66.204 Multipurpose Grants to States and Tribes
-   31,738   31,738
66.432 State Public Water System Supervision
-    1,845,245    1,845,245
66.444 Lead Testing in School and Child Care Program Drinking Water (SDWA
1464(d))
74,622    80   74,702
66.454 Water Quality Management Planning
-   180,263   180,263
66.460 Nonpoint Source Implementation Grants
190,731    145   190,876
66.461 Regional Wetland Program Development Grants
-   195,193   195,193
66.472 Beach Monitoring and Notification Program Implementation Grants
-   236,644   236,644
66.605 Performance Partnership Grants
-    9,692,563    9,692,563
66.608 Environmental Information Exchange Network Grant Program and Related
Assistance
-   47,405   47,405
66.700 Consolidated Pesticide Enforcement Cooperative Agreements
-   522,748   522,748
66.708 Pollution Prevention Grants Program
105,954   23,318   129,272
66.802 Superfund State, Political Subdivision, and Indian Tribe Site-Specific
Cooperative Agreements
-   779,508   779,508
66.804 Underground Storage Tank Prevention, Detection and Compliance Program
-   404,536   404,536
66.805 Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Corrective Action Program
-   895,021   895,021
66.809 Superfund State and Indian Tribe Core Program Cooperative Agreements
-   163,731   163,731
66.817 State and Tribal Response Program Grants
-    1,110,790    1,110,790
66.818 Brownfields Assessment and Cleanup Cooperative Agreements
378,000   24,167   402,167
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 108 -
Clean Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
66.458 Capitalization Grants for Clean Water State Revolving Funds
$ 17,231,040  $ -  $  17,231,040
Total Clean Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
$ 17,231,040  $ -  $  17,231,040
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
66.468 Capitalization Grants for Drinking Water State Revolving Funds
$ 9,870,663  $  4,846,102  $  14,716,765
Total Drinking Water State Revolving Fund Cluster
$ 9,870,663  $  4,846,102  $  14,716,765
Total Environmental Protection Agency
$ 27,989,036  $  22,367,863  $  50,356,899
Department of Energy
81.041 State Energy Program
$  -  $ 560,327  $ 560,327
81.042 Weatherization Assistance for Low-Income Persons
3,459,724   352,853    3,812,577
81.104 Environmental Remediation and Waste Processing and Disposal
-   4,604   4,604
81.106 Transport of Transuranic Wastes to the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant: States and
Tribal Concerns, Proposed Solutions
-   -
Pass Through from: Western Interstate Energy Brd 104    74,723
Pass Through from: Western Governor's Association 45        (79)
Total 81.106
74,644
81.117 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Information Dissemination, Outreach,
Training and Technical Analysis/Assistance
59,942   104,428
Pass Through from: Washington State University 103       2,413
Total 81.117
166,783
81.214 Environmental Monitoring/Cleanup, Cultural and Resource Mgmt., Emergency
Response Research, Outreach, Technical Analysis
11,200   895,655   906,855
81.U01 83358
1,619,920   195,947    1,815,867
81.U02 20120068576
-   -
Pass Through from: National Fish & Wildlife Found 521384139       17,225
Total 81.U02
17,225
81.U03 20120068576
4,594   4,594
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 109 -
81.U04 21084G
-   22,252
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       83,086
Total 81.U04
105,338
81.U05 21104G
-   2,260
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       40,042
Total 81.U05
42,302
81.U06 22075G
-   91,416
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       332,057
Total 81.U06
423,473
81.U07 22134G
-   7,337
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       24,457
Total 81.U07
31,794
81.U08 22137G
-   78,399
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       226,830
Total 81.U08
305,229
81.U09 22141G
-   79,943
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       319,111
Total 81.U09
399,054
81.U10 22148G
-   154,514
Pass Through from: Pacific States Marine Fish Com 936002376       586,925
Total 81.U10
741,439
81.U11 4020002022
-   1,776
Pass Through from: Confed Tribes Umatilla Indian 930624734       4,609
Total 81.U11
6,385
81.U12 74313REL101
-   157,316   157,316
81.U13 74313REL102
-    1,304,170    1,304,170
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 110 -
81.U14 74313REL103
-    1,302,690    1,302,690
81.U15 74313REL104
-   145,666   145,666
81.U16 74313REL105
-   462,649   462,649
81.U17 74313REL106
-   674,494   674,494
81.U18 74313REL107
-    1,379,578    1,379,578
81.U19 74313REL108
-    1,264,256    1,264,256
81.U20 74313REL109
-   454,450   454,450
81.U21 74313REL110
-    1,002,541    1,002,541
81.U22 74313REL112
-   64,904   64,904
81.U23 74313REL113
-   458,306   458,306
81.U24 74313REL114
-   460,598   460,598
81.U25 74313REL79
-    928    928
81.U26 74313REL80
-    1,043,302    1,043,302
81.U27 74313REL84
-    (3,928)  (3,928)
81.U28 74313REL85
-   94,837   94,837
81.U29 74313REL91
-    1,265,928    1,265,928
81.U30 74313REL92
-    (1,747)  (1,747)
81.U31 74313REL96
-   41,803   41,803
81.U32 74313REL98
-   24,178   24,178
81.U33 74313REL99
-    1,430,929    1,430,929
81.U34 84041REL01
-   122,035   122,035
81.U35 84041REL02
-   84,481   84,481
81.U36 84041REL03
-   21,588   21,588
81.U37 87356
-   6,019   6,019
81.U38 Not Available
-    88    88
81.U39 T1983521
-   -
Pass Through from: Confed Tribes Warm Springs Ind 390383362       11,351
Total 81.U39
11,351
Total Department of Energy
$ 5,150,786  $  17,541,114  $  22,691,900
Department of Education
84.002 Adult Education - Basic Grants to States
$ 6,396,645  $ 826,157  $  7,222,802
84.010 Title I Grants to Local Educational Agencies
137,506,399    1,490,673    138,997,072
84.011 Migrant Education State Grant Program
22,397,931    1,699,107    24,097,038
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 111 -
84.013 Title I State Agency Program for Neglected and Delinquent Children and Youth
1,578,504    114    1,578,618
84.048 Career and Technical Education -- Basic Grants to States
12,720,898    2,456,941    15,177,839
84.051 Career and Technical Education -- National Programs
104,730   175,650   280,380
84.126 Rehabilitation Services Vocational Rehabilitation Grants to States
1,071,234    61,096,114    62,167,348
84.144 Migrant Education Coordination Program
-   139,380   139,380
84.177 Rehabilitation Services Independent Living Services for Older Individuals Who
are Blind
-   92,604   92,604
84.181 COVID-19 Special Education-Grants for Infants and Families
1,704,014   -
84.181 Special Education-Grants for Infants and Families
3,725,153   405,461
Total 84.181       5,834,628
84.184 School Safety National Activities (formerly, Safe and Drug-Free Schools and
Communities-National Programs
-   629,157   629,157
84.187 Supported Employment Services for Individuals with the Most Significant
Disabilities
-   239,298   239,298
84.196 Education for Homeless Children and Youth
588,325   192,374   780,699
84.287 Twenty-First Century Community Learning Centers
11,514,969   527,873    12,042,842
84.305 Education Research, Development and Dissemination
-   48,958   48,958
84.323 Special Education - State Personnel Development
463,731   97,712   561,443
84.358 Rural Education
441,247   36,507   477,754
84.365 English Language Acquisition State Grants
5,428,354   436,731    5,865,085
84.367 Supporting Effective Instruction State Grant (formerly Improving Teacher
Quality State Grants)
18,714,714   703,076    19,417,790
84.369 Grants for State Assessments and Related Activities
-    5,856,582    5,856,582
84.377 School Improvement Grants
1,227,667   12,335    1,240,002
84.421 Disability Innovation Fund (DIF)
-   355,703   355,703
84.U01 83621
-   1,835   1,835
84.U02 86155
-    (4,834)  (4,834)
84.U03 88793
-   4,131   4,131
84.U04 91990020C0021
-   212,073   212,073
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 112 -
Special Education Cluster (IDEA)
84.027 COVID-19 Special Education Grants to States
$ 10,163,741  $ -  $
84.027 Special Education Grants to States
127,179,251    7,410,965
Total 84.027       144,753,957
84.173 COVID-19 Special Education Preschool Grants
853,720   -
84.173 Special Education Preschool Grants
3,898,623   231,714
Total 84.173       4,984,057
Total Special Education Cluster (IDEA)
$ 142,095,335  $  7,642,679  $  149,738,014
Student Support and Academic Enrichment Program
84.424A Student Support and Academic Enrichment Program
$ 9,740,464  $ 223,240  $  9,963,704
84.424D Expanding Access to Well-Rounded Courses Demonstration Grants Program
421,956   421,956
Total Student Support and Academic Enrichment Program
$ 9,740,464  $ 645,196  $  10,385,660
Education Stabilization Fund (ESF)
84.425 COVID-19 Education Stabilization Fund
$ 5,454,371  $ -  $  5,454,371
84.425C COVID-19 Governor’s Emergency Education Relief (GEER) Fund
162,622   46,345   208,967
84.425D COVID-19 Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) Fund
246,385,446    7,222,919    253,608,365
84.425R COVID-19 Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act,
2021 – Emergency Assistance to Non-Public Schools (CRRSA EANS) program
-    12,270,309    12,270,309
84.425U COVID-19 American Rescue Plan – Elementary and Secondary School
Emergency Relief (ARP ESSER)
157,653,512    1,087,489    158,741,001
84.425V COVID-19 American Rescue Plan – Emergency Assistance to Non-Public
Schools (ARP- EANS)
-   107,768   107,768
84.425W COVID-19 American Rescue Plan – Elementary and Secondary School
Emergency Relief – Homeless Children and Youth
546,240   56,422   602,662
Total Education Stabilization Fund (ESF)
$ 410,202,191  $  20,791,252  $  430,993,443
Total Department of Education
$ 787,622,505  $  106,810,839  $  894,433,344
Elections Assistance Commission
90.401 Help America Vote Act Requirements Payments
$  -  $ 623,124  $ 623,124
90.404 2018 HAVA Election Security Grants
-    2,636,194    2,636,194
Total Elections Assistance Commission
$  -  $  3,259,318  $  3,259,318
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 113 -
Department of Health and Human Services
93.041 Special Programs for the Aging, Title VII, Chapter 3, Programs for Prevention of
Elder Abuse, Neglect, and Exploitation
$  34,344  $ -  $ 34,344
93.042 COVID-19 Special Programs for the Aging, Title VII, Chapter 2, Long Term
Care Ombudsman Services for Older Individuals
-   34,056
93.042 Special Programs for the Aging, Title VII, Chapter 2, Long Term Care
Ombudsman Services for Older Individuals
-   281,091
Total 93.042       315,147
93.043 COVID-19 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part D, Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion Services
38,913   -
93.043 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part D, Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion Services
209,648   -
Total 93.043       248,561
93.048 COVID-19 Special Programs for the Aging, Title IV, and Title II, Discretionary
Projects
8,766   356,484
93.048 Special Programs for the Aging, Title IV, and Title II, Discretionary Projects
35,000   540,040
Total 93.048       940,290
93.052 COVID-19 National Family Caregiver Support, Title III, Part E
690,404   10,283
93.052 National Family Caregiver Support, Title III, Part E
1,980,296   139,356
Total 93.052       2,820,339
93.066 State Vital Statistics Improvement Program
-   769,403   769,403
93.069 Public Health Emergency Preparedness
4,111,139    4,962,865    9,074,004
93.070 COVID-19 Environmental Public Health and Emergency Response
-   196,270
93.070 Environmental Public Health and Emergency Response
90,088    1,212,085
Total 93.070       1,498,443
93.071 Medicare Enrollment Assistance Program
79,835   67,329   147,164
93.073 Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities - Prevention and Surveillance
-   -
Pass Through from: OHSU 20000000000011       15,054
Total 93.073
15,054
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 114 -
93.079 Cooperative Agreements to Promote Adolescent Health through School-Based
HIV/STD Prevention and School-Based Surveillance
-   5,680   5,680
93.082 Sodium Reduction in Communities
-   123,866   123,866
93.090 COVID-19 Guardianship Assistance
-   931,012
93.090 Guardianship Assistance
-    9,749,560
Total 93.090       10,680,572
93.092 Affordable Care Act (ACA) Personal Responsibility Education Program
187,500   353,593   541,093
93.103 Food and Drug Administration Research
3,750   868,443   872,193
93.110 Maternal and Child Health Federal Consolidated Programs
-   106,919
Pass Through from: Assoc of St Ph Nutritionists 40000000000032       58,934
Total 93.110
165,853
93.113 Environmental Health
-    80
Pass Through from: Oregon State University 30000000000004       19,537
Total 93.113
19,617
93.116 Project Grants and Cooperative Agreements for Tuberculosis Control Programs
-   776,325   776,325
93.127 Emergency Medical Services for Children
-   134,278   134,278
93.130 Cooperative Agreements to States/Territories for the Coordination and
Development of Primary Care Offices
-   199,709   199,709
93.136 COVID-19 Injury Prevention and Control Research and State and Community
Based Programs
-   31,020
93.136 Injury Prevention and Control Research and State and Community Based
Programs
806,948    3,974,427
Pass Through from: Oregon Health & Science Univer 237083114        (1)
Total 93.136
4,812,394
93.150 Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness (PATH)
639,734   28,508   668,242
93.197 Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Projects, State and Local Childhood Lead
Poisoning Prevention and Surveillance of Blood Lead Levels in Children
-   362,722   362,722
93.217 Family Planning Services
28,645   112,219   140,864
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 115 -
93.235 Title V State Sexual Risk Avoidance Education (Title V State SRAE) Program
-   644,862   644,862
93.236 Grants to States to Support Oral Health Workforce Activities
-   273,269   273,269
93.240 COVID-19 State Capacity Building
-   31,388
93.240 State Capacity Building
-   553,280
Total 93.240       584,668
93.243 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Projects of Regional and National
Significance
1,860,035    1,436,206    3,296,241
93.251 Universal Newborn Hearing Screening
11,904   221,092   232,996
93.262 Occupational Safety and Health Program
63,854    -
Pass Through from: OHSU 20000000000011       121,496
Total 93.262
185,350
93.268 COVID-19 Immunization Cooperative Agreements
26,009,504    7,039,674
93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements
999,840    51,783,040
Total 93.268       85,832,058
93.270 Viral Hepatitis Prevention and Control
-   501,870   501,870
93.279 Drug Abuse and Addiction Research Programs
-    129
Pass Through from: OHSU 20000000000011       33,942
Total 93.279
34,071
93.314 Early Hearing Detection and Intervention Information System (EHDI-IS)
Surveillance Program
-   263,582   263,582
93.317 COVID-19 Emerging Infections Programs
18,750    1,108,973
93.317 Emerging Infections Programs
227,593    3,285,777
Total 93.317       4,641,093
93.323 COVID-19 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases (ELC)
51,808,112    66,967,682
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases (ELC)
(1,080,365)   2,823,432
Total 93.323       120,518,861
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 116 -
93.324 State Health Insurance Assistance Program
15,494   762,194   777,688
93.336 COVID-19 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
-   536,577
93.336 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
-   207,179
Total 93.336       743,756
93.354 COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Response: Cooperative Agreement for
Emergency Response: Public Health Crisis Response
3,353,240   874,832
93.354 Public Health Emergency Response: Cooperative Agreement for Emergency
Response: Public Health Crisis Response
-   3,963
Total 93.354       4,232,035
93.369 ACL Independent Living State Grants
-   100,252   100,252
93.378 Integrated Care for Kids Model
1,379,507   776,093    2,155,600
93.380 Public Health Cancer Genomics Program
-   276,892   276,892
93.387 National and State Tobacco Control Program
-    1,821,987    1,821,987
93.391 COVID-19 Activities to Support State, Tribal, Local and Territorial (STLT)
Health Department Response to Public Health or Healthcare Crises
6,321,805   814,876    7,136,681
93.421 Strengthening Public Health Systems and Services through National Partnerships
to Improve and Protect the Nation's Health
-   -
Pass Through from: Natl Assoc Chronic Dis Direct 40000000000015       165,144
Total 93.421
165,144
93.423 State Innovation Waivers
-    54,775,261    54,775,261
93.426 Improving the Health of Americans through Prevention and Management of
Diabetes and Heart Disease and Stroke
22,056    2,107,982    2,130,038
93.434 Every Student Succeeds Act/Preschool Development Grants
1,342,101    3,407,270    4,749,371
93.464 ACL Assistive Technology
493,308   -   493,308
93.498 COVID-19 Provider Relief Fund
-    3,051,734    3,051,734
93.499 COVID-19 Low Income Household Water Assistance Program
502,328   176,480
93.499 Low Income Household Water Assistance Program
894,772   202,783
Total 93.499       1,776,363
93.505 Affordable Care Act (ACA) Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home
Visiting Program
-   2,394   2,394
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 117 -
93.525 COVID-19 State Planning and Establishment Grants for the Affordable Care Act
(ACA)'s Exchanges
-   105,722   105,722
93.556 COVID-19 Promoting Safe and Stable Families
-   122,750
93.556 Promoting Safe and Stable Families
826,771    3,309,896
Total 93.556       4,259,417
93.558 COVID-19 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
-    12,165,426
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
2,081,684    79,783,670
Total 93.558       94,030,780
93.563 Child Support Enforcement
11,148,717    54,983,301    66,132,018
93.566 Refugee and Entrant Assistance State/Replacement Designee Administered
Programs
-    4,547,883    4,547,883
93.568 COVID-19 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance
35,475,875   291,847
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance
31,768,003    1,981,084
Total 93.568       69,516,809
93.569 COVID-19 Community Services Block Grant
2,422,944   2,797
93.569 Community Services Block Grant
6,458,637   377,615
Total 93.569       9,261,993
93.579 U.S. Repatriation
-   (506)   (506)
93.586 State Court Improvement Program
-   545,267   545,267
93.590 COVID-19 Community-Based Child Abuse Prevention Grants
-   382,020
93.590 Community-Based Child Abuse Prevention Grants
-   353,604
Total 93.590       735,624
93.597 Grants to States for Access and Visitation Programs
86,941   15,476   102,417
93.599 COVID-19 Chafee Education and Training Vouchers Program (ETV)
-   67,945
93.599 Chafee Education and Training Vouchers Program (ETV)
-    1,180,399
Total 93.599       1,248,344
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 118 -
93.603 Adoption and Legal Guardianship Incentive Payments
-    1,114,240    1,114,240
93.630 COVID-19 Developmental Disabilities Basic Support and Advocacy Grants
-   48,842
93.630 Developmental Disabilities Basic Support and Advocacy Grants
-   615,498
Total 93.630       664,340
93.639 COVID-19 State Planning Grants for Qualifying Community-Based Mobile
Crisis Intervention Services
-   21,100   21,100
93.643 Children's Justice Grants to States
142,760   112,488   255,248
93.645 COVID-19 Stephanie Tubbs Jones Child Welfare Services Program
-   254,285
93.645 Stephanie Tubbs Jones Child Welfare Services Program
433,687    3,450,304
Total 93.645       4,138,276
93.658 COVID-19 Foster Care Title IV-E
(14)   1,604,073
93.658 Foster Care Title IV-E
2,122,319    123,912,946
Total 93.658       127,639,324
93.659 ARRA - Adoption Assistance
-   6,000
93.659 COVID-19 Adoption Assistance
-    3,997,143
93.659 Adoption Assistance
-    50,865,661
Total 93.659       54,868,804
93.665 COVID-19 Emergency Grants to Address Mental and Substance Use Disorders
During COVID-19
550,921    3,661,888    4,212,809
93.667 Social Services Block Grant
2,908,132    22,723,811    25,631,943
93.669 Child Abuse and Neglect State Grants
-   525,710   525,710
93.671 COVID-19 Family Violence Prevention and Services/Domestic Violence Shelter
and Supportive Services
-    (5,665)
93.671 Family Violence Prevention and Services/Domestic Violence Shelter and
Supportive Services
1,482,139   -
Total 93.671       1,476,474
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 119 -
93.674 COVID-19 John H. Chafee Foster Care Independence Program for Successful
Transition to Adulthood
-    1,492,267
93.674 John H. Chafee Foster Care Independence Program for Successful Transition to
Adulthood
-    4,022,973
Total 93.674       5,515,240
93.738 PPHF: Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Program financed
solely by Public Prevention and Health Funds
-    588
Pass Through from: Multnomah County 40000000000010       77,662
Total 93.738
78,250
93.747 COVID-19 Elder Abuse Prevention Interventions Program
-   244,301
93.747 Elder Abuse Prevention Interventions Program
-   134,885
Total 93.747       379,186
93.767 ARRA - Children's Health Insurance Program
-    3
93.767 COVID-19 Children's Health Insurance Program
-    19,638,415
93.767 Children's Health Insurance Program
-    319,811,099
Total 93.767       339,449,517
93.779 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Research, Demonstrations
and Evaluations
7,700   8,130   15,830
93.788 Opioid STR
11,467,210    4,427,263    15,894,473
93.796 State Survey Certification of Health Care Providers and Suppliers (Title XIX)
Medicaid
-    3,506,025    3,506,025
93.800 Organized Approaches to Increase Colorectal Cancer Screening
84,320   722,230   806,550
93.845 Promoting Population Health through Increased Capacity in Alcohol
Epidemiology
-   108,396   108,396
93.870 Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Grant
4,542,839    1,992,256    6,535,095
93.876 Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance in Retail Food Specimens
-   201,392   201,392
93.889 COVID-19 National Bioterrorism Hospital Preparedness Program
421,912   -
93.889 National Bioterrorism Hospital Preparedness Program
1,459,008    1,561,244
Total 93.889       3,442,164
93.898 Cancer Prevention and Control Programs for State, Territorial and Tribal
Organizations
-    3,608,180    3,608,180
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 120 -
93.917 COVID-19 HIV Care Formula Grants
26,068    7
93.917 HIV Care Formula Grants
1    8,110,632
Total 93.917       8,136,708
93.940 HIV Prevention Activities Health Department Based
912,662    1,652,818    2,565,480
93.944 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/Acquired Immunodeficiency Virus
Syndrome (AIDS) Surveillance
849,271   120,153   969,424
93.945 Assistance Programs for Chronic Disease Prevention and Control
-   263,648   263,648
93.946 Cooperative Agreements to Support State-Based Safe Motherhood and Infant
Health Initiative Programs
-   178,031   178,031
93.958 COVID-19 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
245,798    2,606,762
93.958 Block Grants for Community Mental Health Services
10,354,831    2,082,822
Total 93.958       15,290,213
93.959 COVID-19 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse
-    8,715,778
93.959 Block Grants for Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse
15,082,379    3,463,941
Pass Through from: Eagle Technologies, Inc 40000000000024       206,993
Total 93.959
27,469,091
93.977 COVID-19 Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Prevention and Control Grants
976,367   120,192
93.977 Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Prevention and Control Grants
-    1,175,884
Total 93.977       2,272,443
93.981 COVID-19 Improving Student Health and Academic Achievement through
Nutrition, Physical Activity and the Management of Chronic Conditions in
Schools
-   165,293
93.981 Improving Student Health and Academic Achievement through Nutrition,
Physical Activity and the Management of Chronic Conditions in Schools
52,386   257,052
Total 93.981       474,731
93.982 Mental Health Disaster Assistance and Emergency Mental Health
3,843,584   544,880    4,388,464
93.991 Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant
98,861   932,512    1,031,373
93.994 Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant to the States
3,646,216    2,494,242    6,140,458
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 121 -
Aging Cluster
93.044 COVID-19 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part B, Grants for
Supportive Services and Senior Centers
$ 2,099,251  $ 23,307  $
93.044 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part B, Grants for Supportive Services
and Senior Centers
4,890,123   418,363
Total 93.044       7,431,044
93.045 COVID-19 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part C, Nutrition Services
5,581,469   577,044
93.045 Special Programs for the Aging, Title III, Part C, Nutrition Services
7,792,644   617,586
Total 93.045       14,568,743
93.053 Nutrition Services Incentive Program
1,535,156   -    1,535,156
Total Aging Cluster
$ 21,898,643  $  1,636,300  $  23,534,943
CCDF Cluster
93.489 Child Care Disaster Relief
$  134,636  $ -  $ 134,636
93.575 COVID-19 Child Care and Development Block Grant
918,857    290,110,045
93.575 Child Care and Development Block Grant
16,339,933    71,799,154
Total 93.575       379,167,989
93.596 Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds of the Child Care and Development
Fund
115,925    12,246,111    12,362,036
Total CCDF Cluster
$ 17,509,351  $  374,155,310  $  391,664,661
Head Start Cluster
93.600 Head Start
$  -  $ 43,947  $ 43,947
Total Head Start Cluster
$  -  $ 43,947  $ 43,947
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 122 -
Medicaid Cluster
93.775 State Medicaid Fraud Control Units
$  -  $  2,454,446  $  2,454,446
93.777 COVID-19 State Survey and Certification of Health Care Providers and Suppliers
(Title XVIII) Medicare
-   3,401
93.777 State Survey and Certification of Health Care Providers and Suppliers (Title
XVIII) Medicare
-    5,298,317
Total 93.777       5,301,718
93.778 ARRA - Medical Assistance Program
-    4,441,426
93.778 COVID-19 Medical Assistance Program
-    887,826,852
93.778 Medical Assistance Program
-   9,891,869,450
Total 93.778       10,784,137,728
Total Medicaid Cluster
$  -  $ 10,791,893,892  $ 10,791,893,892
Total Department of Health and Human Services
$ 294,628,187  $ 12,169,027,236  $ 12,463,655,423
Corporation For National and Community Service
94.003 State Commissions
$  -  $ 233,871  $ 233,871
94.006 AmeriCorps
3,087,683   -    3,087,683
94.008 Commission Investment Fund
-   22,629   22,629
94.009 Training and Technical Assistance
61,570   95,788   157,358
94.013 Volunteers in Service to America
-   -
Pass Through from: Corp for Ntl & Comm Service 10000000000007       65,277
Total 94.013
65,277
Total Corporation For National and Community Service
$ 3,149,253  $ 417,565  $  3,566,818
Office of National Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of 2006
95.001 High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas Program
$  -  $  2,796,809  $  2,796,809
Total Office of National Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of 2006
$  -  $  2,796,809  $  2,796,809
State of Oregon
Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Year Ended June 30, 2022
Assistance Federal Grantor / Pass-Through Grantor /  Pass-Through Passed-Through Direct Total Program /
Listing Number Program or Cluster Title Identifying Number to Subrecipients Expenditures Cluster Expenditures
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
- 123 -
Social Security Administration
96.008 Social Security - Work Incentives Planning and Assistance Program
$  -  $ 41,841  $ 41,841
Disability Insurance/SSI Cluster
96.001 Social Security Disability Insurance
$  -  $  30,049,681  $  30,049,681
Total Disability Insurance/SSI Cluster
$  -  $  30,049,681  $  30,049,681
Total Social Security Administration
$  -  $  30,091,522  $  30,091,522
Department of Homeland Security
97.008 Non-Profit Security Program
$  684,241  $ -  $ 684,241
97.012 Boating Safety Financial Assistance
1,272,720   64,309    1,337,029
97.023 Community Assistance Program State Support Services Element (CAP-SSSE)
-   98,659   98,659
97.029 Flood Mitigation Assistance
5,252   -   5,252
97.032 Crisis Counseling
(128,630)  128,630    -
97.036 COVID-19 Disaster Grants - Public Assistance (Presidentially Declared
Disasters)
(13,317,779)   44,659,233
97.036 Disaster Grants - Public Assistance (Presidentially Declared Disasters)
78,979,848    10,555,477
Pass Through from: Chemeketa Community College 13000       179,762
Total 97.036
121,056,541
97.039 Hazard Mitigation Grant
854,933   418,284    1,273,217
97.041 National Dam Safety Program
-   121,078   121,078
97.042 Emergency Management Performance Grants
4,715,337    1,331,178    6,046,515
97.044 Assistance to Firefighters Grant
-   225,485   225,485
97.045 Cooperating Technical Partners
-   789,348   789,348
97.047 Pre-Disaster Mitigation
160,956   169,713   330,669
97.050 Presidential Declared Disaster Assistance to Individuals and Households - Other
Needs
-    3,596,007    3,596,007
97.067 Homeland Security Grant Program
3,043,465    1,597,289    4,640,754
97.082 Earthquake Consortium
-   14,581   14,581
97.088 Disaster Assistance Projects
-   4,360   4,360
Total Department of Homeland Security
$ 76,270,343  $  63,953,393  $  140,223,736
TOTAL EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL AWARDS
$  2,100,660,681  $ 18,721,743,276  $ 20,822,403,957
State of Oregon
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 124
Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accompanying schedule of expenditures of federal awards includes the federal grant activity of the
State of Oregon and is presented using the bases of accounting of the originating funds. These include
both the modified accrual and accrual basis of accounting. The information in the schedule is presented
in accordance with the requirements of Title 2 CFR Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements,
Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance). Therefore, some
amounts presented in the schedule may differ from the amounts presented in, or used in the
preparation of, the basic financial statements.
The financial statements of the State of Oregon include all fund types for all agencies, boards,
commissions, and courts that are legally part of the State's primary government and its component
units. The Oregon Health and Science University, University of Oregon, Oregon State University,
Portland State University, Eastern Oregon University, Oregon Institute of Technology, South ern
Oregon University, Western Oregon University, State Accident Insurance Fund, State Fair Council, and
Oregon Affordable Housing Assistance Corporation are legally separate component units. For the year
ended June 30, 2022, these component units have issued separate financial statements and have
obtained a separate single audit as outlined in §200.514 of Uniform Guidance. Therefore, the
accompanying schedule does not include the federal grant activity of these component units. Readers
may obtain complete financial statements from their respective administrative offices or from the
Oregon Department of Administrative Services, Chief Financial Office, 155 Cottage Street NE, Salem,
Oregon 97301-3969.
Note 2. DeMinimis Cost Rate
The State of Oregon has not elected to use the 10 percent de minimis cost rates as covered in
§200.414 "Indirect (F&A) costs" of Uniform Guidance.
Note 3. Programs Involving Non-Cash Assistance
Federal expenditures reported in the schedule include the following non -cash assistance programs. All
values are either fair market value at the time of receipt or assessed value provided by the federal
agency.
Assistance
Listing # Title      Type of Assistance  Value
10.555 National School Lunch Program Food Commodities $19,554,855
10.559 Summer Food Service Program for Children Food Commodities 270,114
10.565 Commodity Supplemental Food Program Food Commodities 600,959
10.569 Emergency Food Assistance Program (Food
Commodities) Food Commodities 18,000,399
39.003 Donation of Federal Surplus Personal Property Surplus Property 1,443,505
93.268 Immunization Cooperative Agreements Vaccines  47,161,154
Total                                                                                                                         $87,030,986
State of Oregon
Notes to the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 125
Note 4. Unemployment Insurance
State unemployment tax revenues and the other governmental, tribal and non-profit reimbursements
in lieu of State taxes are deposited into the Unemployment Trust Fund in the U.S. Treasury. These
funds may only be used to pay benefits under federally approved State unemployment law.
State unemployment insurance funds are included with federal funds in the total expenditures for
Assistance Listing 17.225 (Unemployment Insurance Program). Of the $ 1,564,687,878.05 reported as
expenditures for the Unemployment Insurance Program, $529,176,781.60 represents expenditures of
State funds held in the Unemployment Trust Fund.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2022-18 | June 2022 | page 126
Prior Year Financial Statement Findings
This section includes the current status reported by the department of all financial audit findings from fiscal
year ended June 30, 2021. It also includes the current status reported by the department of all financial audit
findings from fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 that were uncorrected at June 30, 2021.
Finding 2021-001:   Department of Human Resources/Oregon Health Authority
Improve internal controls over the SNAP program
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management obtain a SOC report over the service organization’s inter nal
controls for the ONE application. Management should also ensure post implementation
testing and QC reviews take place and determine if the overrides indicate an error in
the application’s processing. Additionally, we recommend management update review
procedures to ensure year-end account balances are supported.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
ODHS did the procurement for the ongoing Support of the ONE system . There were
three sections that vendors could bid on. SOC audit was part of that area, however, the
same vendor won all three areas. Based on that, ODHS will be going and doing a new
procurement for a SOC audit to happen regularly on the system, and put the request
for funding for this in our agency requested budget. We intend to have an independent
vendor for SOC in the first quarter of the next biennium, assuming we are legislatively
funded.
ODHS in partnership with OHA has continued to test the ONE system, looking at
outcomes and determinations around benefits. We are monitoring audits, reviews, and
continuing to test to ensure the quality of calculations and have had the lowest level of
known defects since the system went live, while implementing multiple new programs
and waivers.
ODHS continues to monitor overrides and is looking at opportunities to support and
ensure accurate and timely benefits.
Quality Control reviews have continued for programs, findings beyond being submitted
to federal partners, are being shared with program and OEP, including QA, to review if
there are patterns, training, or system issues that could be addressed to minimize
future errors.
In addition to the existing interface processes staff performed a full reconciliation
between the SNAP transactions from the ONE system (authorizations) & FIS (usages)
to the transactions processed by JV and sent to SFMA. This process has been
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 127
completed through November 2022. The reports/data needed for this process are
currently requested through an adhoc request. In addition to this we are working on
the following items:
• Working with OIS to create a monthly automated process to support the
monthly reconciliation, including designing additional reports for monitoring
“valid” delays in EBT reporting
• Drafting a request to have control reports created from the ONE system that
would allow us to enhance our current daily interface validation process
between ONE & JV
Anticipated Completion Date: June 2023
Finding 2021-002:   Department of Consumer and Business Services
Improve documentation to facilitate review
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure procedures for determining the accounts receivable
balances are documented, including relevant data download requests and filters, and
how uncollectible percentages are applied to outstanding balances. We also
recommend the department ensure effective reviews are performed by maintaining
documentation that is sufficiently detailed and readily available.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-003:   Oregon Department of Forestry
Strengthen controls to ensure appropriate receivable balances
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management implement controls to ensure compliance with state policy
over the billing and collection of accounts receivable. We also recommend
management strengthen internal controls to ensure receivables are appropriately
recorded, reviewed, supported and reported at year end.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
Actions taken: The department implemented a software solution, SAGE AR, which
district and central service employees use to create invoices and upload supporting
documentation for revenue related transactions. The use of SAGE AR provides an
added layer of internal control to ensure recorded revenue is adequately supported and
accurate. Additionally, the department assigned all eligible liquidated and delinquent
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 128
accounts receivable to the Department of Revenue by June 30, 2022, as required by
ORS 293.231.
Current status: Department-specific accounts receivable policies have been drafted to
ensure compliance with statewide accounts receivable management policies. An annual
review was conducted to verify accounts receivable balances were properly adjusted to
account for affiliated cash receipts; however, additional procedural updates are
necessary to ensure these reviews are done timelier. Furthermore, the department
plans to reclassify all accounts receivable activity using document-supported general
ledger accounts to ensure duplicate reporting of current and noncurrent accounts
receivable balances does not occur.
Finding 2021-004:   Oregon Department of Forestry
Strengthen accrual methodologies and review procedures over expenditures
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Management ensure year-end accrual methodologies reflect a complete understanding
of relationships between overlapping procedures, including detailed parameters to
mitigate duplication. Additionally, we recommend management ensure transaction
review is adequate and includes examination of overall account balances subsequent to
completion of individual transactions.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-005:   Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
Improve cash handling and reconciliation controls
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management improve cash receipting controls to ensure checks are
safeguarded, properly tracked, and accounted for in the financial records. Additionally,
we recommend department management ensure completed cash reconciliations are
reviewed timely.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 129
Finding 2021-006:   Oregon Department of Transportation
Ensure adequate controls are in place over revenue recording
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure adequate internal controls are in place to
appropriately record and report revenue.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-007:   Oregon Department of Transportation
Implement controls to ensure proper recording of advanced Federal funds and
eligible expenditures
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure adequate controls are in place to appropriately
record and report advanced federal funding and federally eligible expend itures.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-008:   Oregon Liquor and Cannabis Commission
Strengthen controls over statutorily required transfers
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Commission management strengthen internal controls to ensure the accounting
systems reconcile and that the appropriate amount is being transferred to the General
Fund each month.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
A temp. has been working on the annual reconciliations since he started in May 2022.
He has completed data entry and reconciled many differences through FY 2020 and is
currently working on FY 2021. OLCC plans to continue using a temp. in this role until
the reconciliations are caught up.
Finding 2020-001:   Department of Revenue
Consider historic percentages in accruals when methodology requires adjustments
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Department management consider all historical percentages used in its taxes
receivable accrual methodology when unusual changes occur, such as extensions to tax
return due dates, to ensure its estimate is reasonable and more accurate.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 130
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-003:   Department of Revenue
Perform key reconciliations on a timely basis
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Department management design and implement a cash reconciliation between
Treasury and the state accounting system (SFMS). We also recommend department
management ensure revenue subsidiary account reconciliations are performed and
reviewed consistently and timely.
Status: Partial corrective action taken. The agency response is as follows:
The agency implemen ted all eight corrective actions listed in the 2021
response: reconciliation processes have been documented, staff are trained,
and tracksheets and templates have been created and used. However, the
agency still experiences high staff burnout and turnover with this task.
The Department of Revenue receives thousands of transactions every month
for 55 revenue streams and these transactions have to be reconciled across
SFMA, GenTax, and Treasury on a monthly basis. Because of system
limitations, the process is incredibly manual, time-consuming, and risks error.
This is because during the GenTax system build, financial requirements were
not fully represented, considered and/or gathered. This has resulted in a
system that has weak or unknown financial data compilation on the backend,
which results in reports and data not matching bank statements or SFMA.
Staff simply cannot keep up with the number of transactions coupled with the
lack of sound GenTax system reporting.
Since late 2021 the agency’s main priority has been fixing financial recording
and reporting in the GenTax system. The agency has documented all of its
applicable GASB and statewide accounting requirements and applied these
standards to each revenue stream. Over 500 financial requirements were
then compared against how the GenTax system was recording and reporting
these entries in a gap analysis. The agency also interviewed 15 other states
on how they handle GenTax financial reconciliations.
The results of the requirement gap analysis and state interviews were
compiled into a project plan to fix and enhance the GenTax system so
financial reconciliation can happen accurately and automatically. This project
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 131
is slated to launch December 2022 (after the GenTax upgrade is completed in
November 2022) and completed in late 2023.
Finding 2020-004:   Department of Consumer and Business Services
Strengthen controls to ensure complete implementation of new accounting
standards
Material Weakness
Recommendation:   Department management allocate adequate resources to implement significant
financial reporting changes and ensure complete reporting of fiduciary asset activity in
future years.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-005:   Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen review procedures
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department management ensure transaction review is adequate and includes
examination of proper and complete coding, accounting periods, and supporting
documentation.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-008:   Oregon Employment Department
Implement controls to ensure benefit payments do not exceed maximum weekly
benefit amounts
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Department run and review the system generated report or develop alternate controls
to ensure benefit payments do not exceed the maximum weekly benefit amount.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 132
Finding 2020-011:   Oregon Liquor Control Commission
Ensure timely completion of agent inventory audits
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Management complete agent inventory audits for all stores that haven’t had one in the
last 12 months as soon as possible. We also recommend management ensure control
processes for agent audits are documented in formal written procedures.
Status: Partial corrective action taken. The agency response is as follows:
OLCC has fallen further behind since COVID continued to impact our ability to perform
audits. Some stores outside of the local area that were scheduled called at the last -
minute saying employees had COVID and they needed to close and didn’t want to put
anyone at risk. We have not yet seta a policy to include the risk-based factor of these
audits but that is something OLCC will be considering. Currently there are 31 stores
that have gone beyond a twelve-month audit period.
Finding 2020-012:   Oregon Liquor Control Commission
Strengthen controls over system access
Significant Deficiency
Recommendation:   Management perform regular, periodic system access reviews to ensure the continued
appropriateness of assigned user access. We also recommend management update
their policy to align with their decisions for meeting the control objectives.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 133
Prior Year Federal Award Findings and Questioned Costs
This section includes the current status reported by the department of all federal audit findings from
fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. It also includes the current status reported by the department of all
federal audit findings from fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 that were uncorrected at June 30, 2021.
Finding 2021-009:   Department of Human Services
Ensure performance data reports are complete and accurate
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
Reporting
Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2018
Recommendation:   Department management ensure system requirements used to prepare the
ACF-199 and ACF-209 are appropriate to ensure compliance and implement
review procedures to ensure performance data reports submitted are complete
and accurate. We also recommend department management obtain an annual
SOC report over the service organization's internal controls for the ONE
application.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) will develop a workgroup
consisting of policy analysts, business analysts, OIS (Legacy) staff, and
contracted Deloitte staff to complete a comprehensive analysis of the ONE
system report requirements, code, and federal instructions. The comprehensive
analysis will identify areas within both the 199 and 209 where requirement and/or
code are not in sync with the federal instructions. The workgroup will then
conduct work to bring all three areas into sync to ensure the ONE system is
producing accurate and complete federal reports 199 and 209. Through this
process the workgroup will test data and complete data analysis for validation.
The Department is exploring ways to validate data at quarterly submissions.
Once a solution is identified, a procedure will be implemented.
ODHS and the ONE Maintenance and Operations (M&O) program are in a
Request for Proposal (RFP) process to identify our IT service vendor(s) related
to ONE, beginning July 2023. Related to this effort we are projecting annual
SOC reports beginning in the 23-25 biennium and are including these
projections in our 23-25 legislative Policy Option Package (POP) request.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2022
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 134
Finding 2021-010:   Department of Human Services
Ensure work participation rate calculation uses verified and accurate data
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
Special Tests and Provisions
Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2019
Recommendation:   TANF program management ensure the work participation rate is calculated
appropriately using verified and accurate participation data in adherence to the
department’s Work Verification Plan. We also recommend program
management review the system of controls and identify where improvements
are needed to ensure compliance with the work verification plan.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) recently received approval
from Administration for Children and Families for changes made to Oregon’s
Work Verification Plan. The Department is in the process of updating rules and
guidance changing the way educational activity hours can be documented and
verified by allowing greater flexibility. The Department will continue to explore
other options to allow greater flexibility in documenting and verifying
attendance for countable activities. The Department will continue to train staff
on attendance reporting requirements through biannual analyst hour sessions
and individual sessions offered to districts specific to the trends in their area.
The Department will also offer technical assistance to Case Aides who are
responsible for entering participation hours in TRACS.
The Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) has implemented changes
to documentation and verification of hours in educational activities effective
June 1, 2022. Communication was sent out to staff via a Policy Transmittal on
June 15, 2022. TANF Policy analysts continue to explore other options to allow
greater flexibility in documenting and verifying attendance for additional
countable activities. TANF Policy analysts completed a training with  District 2
on June 8, 2022. The training provided covered their district specific error
trends related to attendance documentation.
As stated in our response in a separate finding, titled ‘Ensure performance data
reports are complete and accurate,’ ODHS will test data and complete data
analysis for validation. This process will include the fields where work
participation hours are reported.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2022
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 135
Finding 2021-011:   Department of Human Services
Improve documentation of required income and benefit verifications
93.558 Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
Special Tests and Provisions
Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management ensure verification of income with IEVS screens is
clearly documented in client case files when determining client eligibility. We
also recommend management develop policies and procedures directing case
workers to document their review of the IEVS screens in ONE, the new case
management system.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) is reviewing and revising
the previously submitted Change Request (CR) to implement a system chang e
to capture when staff are using the IEVS screens at eligibility determination.
The previous CR has not been prioritized due to the level of effort (LOE). By
revising the CR, the LOE will reduce while still meeting the needs of the
Department. Until the CR is prioritized, the Department will update the Quick
Reference Guide directing staff to document their review of the IEVS screens in
ONE. A quarterly ONE system announcement reminding staff to check IEVS at
eligibility determination and add a case note will be requested. The ODHS will
also conduct training with staff regarding the IEVS requirements.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2022
Finding 2021-012:   Oregon Housing and Community Services Department
Ensure financial and Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act
reports are submitted
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program  (LIHEAP)
Reporting
Material Weakness; Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management ensure outstanding financial and FFATA reports are
completed and submitted, and allocate sufficient staff resources to ensure
compliance with reporting requirements in future fiscal periods.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 136
The FFATA was removed from the Compliance Supplement but has been added
back as a requirement.
OHCS will reprioritize and assign resources back to FFATA reporting by hiring
additional staff and will have the FFATA reporting current.
OHCS has made multiple attempts in working with our federal partner to
resolve a system reporting issue, as the federal tax ID is incorrect for our
agency.
During this time, the federal reporting platform also transitioned from Grant
Solutions to PMS, and staff have struggled to obtain the appropriate access for
filing reports for this program.
OCHS will continue to assign resources and further pursue this issue, resolving
any access issues and will bring reports current.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2023
Finding 2021-013:   Oregon Housing and Community Services Department
Ensure documentation is maintained to support amounts reported and review
of reports
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management ensure adequate controls are in place to ensure
documentation is maintained to support amounts reported and reports are
reviewed prior to submission.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
Assistant Director has met with the Program Coordinator and reiterated mutual
expectations regarding reporting requirements to include:
• Required reports will be submitted to Assistant Director along with
supporting documentation prior to report submission.
• Assistant Director will review reports and documentation timely and
provide feedback via email
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 137
• Program Coordinator will organize and maintain all support
documentation relative to submitted reports.
• Federal reporting deadlines have been added to both the Assistant
Director and Program Coordinator calendars.
Anticipated Completion Date:  December 31, 2023
Finding 2021-014:   Oregon Housing and Community Services Department
Establish controls to ensure information is readily available to assist in
monitoring compliance requirements
93.568 Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
Earmarking
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management establish controls to ensure system reports are
processed timely to allow for preparation of the GMR reports.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-015:   Department of Human Services
Implement review to ensure accurate behavior rehabilitation service rates
are used
93.658 Foster Care – Title IV-E
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $20,793 (known)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management implement procedures to ensure the accuracy of
behavior rehabilitation service split rates entered into the system and
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 138
Finding 2021-016:   Department of Human Services
Timely review foster care maintenance payment rates for continuing
appropriateness
93.658 Foster Care – Title IV-E
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management ensure reviews of maintenance payment rates for
continuing appropriateness are conducted timely and in compliance with
department rules.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Foster Care and Youth Transitions Program has been notified of the finding
and is in the process of determining how to integrate a consistent two -year
review with their current plan for managing foster care rates. We anticipate
having a procedure to report in the next several weeks.
Anticipated Completion Date: September 30, 2022
Finding 2021-017:   Department of Human Services
Improve controls and compliance over hospitals and long-term care facility
audits
93.777, 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management strengthen controls to ensure the long-term care
facility’s administrator compensation does not exceed the prorated maximum
compensation limit for administrators who average less than 40 hours a week.
We also recommend authority management strengthen controls to ensure
evidence of review is maintained and readily available.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
For the long-term care facility financial statement review audit deficiency
findings, the ongoing corrective action plan is being implemented. The
department is adding administrator hourly audit to the long-term care facility
desk audit procedure. Additionally, the department will ensure to the requested
documentation is placed in a designated folder.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 139
The action plan is to have cost reports and back up documentation stored on a
common drive that selected OHA/HSD employees have access to on a regular
basis.
Anticipated Completion Date: October 30, 2022
Finding 2021-018:   Department of Human Services
Implement review procedures to ensure accuracy of manual cost allocation
calculations
93.777, 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $180,643 (known)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management implement review processes and procedures to
ensure manual calculations are complete and accurate.
Status:   Corrective action taken
Finding 2021-019:    Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen review over costs charged to the program
93.777, 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $72,716 (known)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department and authority management strengthen review controls to ensure
only allowable expenditures are charged to the Medicaid program. Additionally,
we recommend the authority reimburse the federal agency for unallowable
costs.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 140
Finding 2021-020:   Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve documentation for provider eligibility determinations and
revalidations
93.777, 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:   Department and authority management strengthen controls to ensure
documentation supporting a provider’s eligibility determination and revalidation
is retained and is complete.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-021:   Oregon Health Authority
Ensure medical loss ratio reports are complete
93.777, 93.778 Medicaid Cluster
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2021
Recommendation:   Authority management strengthen internal controls to ensure each MLR report
contains all required information.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-022:   Oregon Health Authority
OHA should improve financial reporting accuracy
93.323 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity
Reporting
Material Weakness; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management develop and implement procedures to help ensure
the accuracy of amounts reported in the monthly financial reports. Additionally,
we recommend department management work with the CDC to revise and
resubmit the inaccurate reports.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 141
Finding 2021-023:   Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen review over costs charged to the program
93.767 Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), Non-Major Program
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Matching
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $77,214 (known)
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:   The authority return the questioned costs to the Department of Health and
Human Services.
Status:    Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-024:   Department of Education
Implement controls to ensure accuracy of federal reporting
84.425D Education Stabilization Fund (ESF)
Reporting
Material Weakness; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department develop a process to ensure that accurate expenditure data is
submitted to the federal government for federal reporting.
Status:   Partial Corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
ODE is developing documentation of the tools and processes used to report
annual Education Stabilization Fund data collections. The process has been
updated to define expenses as a paid reimbursement. Updated documentation
will be available in August 2022, after the completion of the reporting period.
Finding 2021-025:   Department of Education
Improve subaward reporting under the Federal Funding Accountability and
Transparency Act
84.010 Title I Grants to Local Educational Agencies
84.425D Education Stabilization Fund (ESF)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management implement controls to ensure the monthly FFATA
reports are independently reviewed to ensure accurate and complete reporting
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 142
of required subaward information. We further recommend department
management ensure the required subaward information is reported for the nine
subawards identified in our testing.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
ODE has processed corrective entries for the nine subawards identified in the
testing. ODE’s written Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act
(FFATA) reporting procedures were reviewed and updated to include processes
to maintain documentation of all communications with the FFATA system
helpdesk regarding data load issues, and to require a monthly review of FFATA
reporting by a senior accountant.
Validation of prior reported data is continuing and any missing subgrants will be
uploaded to FSRS.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2023
Finding 2021-026:   Department of Education
Implement documented methodology and review controls over State Level
of Effort
84.027, 84.173 Special Education Cluster (IDEA)
Level of Effort
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management documents its methodology to ensure the annual
level of effort calculation is consistently performed and document review of
the calculation before the total is entered into the grant applications.
Status:   Partial Corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
ODE has contracted with a national technical assistance provider to inform and
guide the development of a risk assessment program to assist in collecting and
monitoring level of effort. Also, ODE is receiving guidance from the Center for
IDEA Fiscal Reporting in order to develop a better system to address this issue.
The model has been reviewed with the technical assistance providers;
processes that needed to be addressed have been identified; and meetings are
planned for July through September for the development of tools.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 143
Finding 2021-027:   Department of Human Services
Improve controls over EBT card security
10.551, 10.561 Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Cluster
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management implement a consistent process to verify branch
offices are conducting required inventory and accurately completing inventory
control logs.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
The department agrees with the findings of the audit regarding non -compliance
with EBT inventory control processes in 3 of the 17 field offices included in the
review. The department will implement a statewide management strategy to
monitor and verify compliance with required EBT card security and inventory
control log requirements.
The department will use quarterly meetings for local offices to provide updates
to executive leadership on district compliance or progress towards meeting
reporting and verification requirements. The department will require each
district to provide verification of compliance at least annually. The department
will develop and use a tracking tool to monitor compliance by district and
branch. The department will request verification sufficient to prove compliance
with EBT card security and controls.
The department’s executive leadership will support communicating policy and
process guidance in leadership meetings where the following leaders are
present: Program Manager, District Manager, Administrative Support Specialist
and Business Expert meetings. The department will confirm that each district
has sufficient protocols and assist with developing contingency planning to
ensure EBT inventory compliance during staff absences or shortages.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 144
Finding 2021-028:   Oregon Military Department
Strengthen controls to ensure expenditures are not obligated beyond the
period of performance
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance Projects
Period of Performance
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $150,544, Known
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:   Department management implement controls to ensure payroll expenditures
are recorded in the correct federal grant year.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken.
OMD, on November 1st of each year, will deactivate or modify payroll “short
codes” associated with the previous Federal Fiscal Year. This will allow for final
payroll costs to be applied during September Payroll Run 2 which occurs in mid -
October each fiscal year.
When capturing monthly payroll costs to be applied to an SF-270, OMD
accounting staff within the Financial Administration Division will include all open
Fiscal Years within their payroll queries. Payroll costs should only be seen in the
current Fiscal Year, so including all open fiscal years will allow erroneous costs
to be identified and moved to the correct fiscal year prior to a SF-270 being
created.
During their follow-up engagement, Secretary of State identified expenditures
which were applied to the wrong fiscal year, and that OMD Accounting staff had
not already identified. Due to this OMD is changing the Status for this finding to
Partial Corrective Action was taken.
Finding 2021-029:   Oregon Military Department
Strengthen controls to ensure level of federal support for expenditures is
accurately recorded
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance Projects
Matching
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $1,180 (known); $509,544 (likely)
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:   Department management establish controls to ensure the level of federal
support for expenditures is accurately recorded.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 145
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-030:   Oregon Military Department
Strengthen controls to ensure changes in expenditures requested for
reimbursement are sufficiently documented and tracked
12.401 National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance Projects
Reporting
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:   Department management establish controls and procedures to sufficiently
document and track changes in expenditures requested for reimbursement on
SF-270 reports.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-031:   Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
Perform consistent inventory and monitoring of capital assets, including
real property
15.605, 15.611, 15.626 Fish and Wildlife Cluster
Equipment and Real Property Management
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2020
Recommendation:  Department management ensure the configuration and implementation of the
asset management software is completed and an annual physical inventory of
all capital assets, including an annual visual inspection (either physically or
through the use of satellite imagery) of all land and land improvements is
performed.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Department has nearly completed entering historical land records into the
recently implemented Asset Management System. Once a full catalog of land
holdings are available, regional managers will be tasked with inspecting each
parcel to ensure all property is being used in accordance with its originally
intended purpose.
Anticipated Completion Date: June 30, 2024
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 146
Finding 2021-032:   Department of Administrative Services
Ensure costs submitted for reimbursement are allowable
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Activities Allowed or Unallowed
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $3,917,490 (known)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Program management strengthen its review process to include consideration
of all requirements related to the allowability of expenditures and reimburse
the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-033:   Oregon Business Development Department
Strengthen controls to ensure subawards are used for authorized purposes
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $24,573 (known); $61,782 (likely)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management strengthen controls to ensure subawards are used
for authorized purposes. We also recommend department management
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
Some of the actions already taken by the agency as we received additional
emergency assistance funding, specifically for Commercial Rent Relief (CRF)
and Live Venues Support (ARPA), included:
• Requested and secured administrative funding for new programs so
appropriate staff could be added to support both the initial deployment
of funds, and associated monitoring
• Requested and secured a more reasonable time lime to deploy new
program funding to better establish processes for developing program
guidelines, processes, and documentation standards
• OBDD directly administered Round 5 of the COVID-19 Emergency Small
Business Assistance funds, Commercial Rent Relief funds, and Live
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 147
Venue funds, as we recognized many sub-recipients do not have the
same capacity or resources of a state agency
• Delayed distribution of funds until United States Treasury guidance was
final (ARPA funded Live Venues program)
• Made investments in form assembly and other technology resources to
improve application completeness, and application accuracy, that
resulted in streamlining the application review, documentation review,
and contracting of awards
• Created new program development and implementation checklists
In addition, OBDD will carefully consider the utilization of forgivable loans vs.
grants to sub-recipients with requirements for deliverables, such as final
reports, as conditions of forgiveness to ensure funds are spent appropriately.
OBDD will continue to utilize the above strategies as future federal awards are
received to ensure adherence to all federal requirements.
OBDD repaid a total of $5,282 of questioned costs to DAS on July 31, 2022 ,
reports were received from subrecipients documenting costs were eligible for
the remaining $19,291 of questioned costs.
Finding 2021-034:   Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen controls to ensure appropriate subrecipient monitoring is
performed timely
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $372,002 (known); $4,222,558 (likely)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Management strengthen internal controls to ensure appropriate subrecipient
monitoring is performed. Specifically, monitoring procedures should be
performed timely and should be designed to ensure subrecipients use program
monies for allowable purposes. We also recommend management seek
reimbursement of program monies that were not spent by subrecipients or
were used for indirect costs and reimburse the federal agency for unallowable
costs.
Status:    Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 148
Health Systems Division (HSD) – Behavioral Health Response:
• HSD is already in the process of developing a more robust grant
compliance monitoring process and is currently in the pilot phase. We
are currently planning for widespread training and socialization Summ er
2022 with continued compliance monitoring on all grants quarterly
thereafter. However, the internal compliance team (Governance &
Process Improvement –GPI unit) is attempting to acquire dedicated
staff for grant monitoring as this team has not grown at the rate of the
Behavioral Health teams.
HSD – Behavioral Health Response:
• As of the writing of this response, OHA has received final expenditure
reports and recovered $99,613 in unspent funds from one entity. Since
completion of the audit, HSD – Behavioral health, has also confirmed
through expenditure reports that the other two entities expended all
their funding appropriately.
• Behavioral health is working statewide to ensure that all county-based
CRF reports are submitted, and any unspent funds will be returned to
OHA by August 1, 2022. Additionally, OHA will ensure that any unspent
funds will be returned to the US Department of Treasury promptly.
• There was out-reach made to providers by HSD in April 2022 as it
related to CRF funds. We will extend final outreach August 15, 2022,
with a request for all funds to be returned to OHA by September 15,
2022.
Public Health Division (PHD) Response:
• PHD will complete a full analysis of all CRF contracts and posted
payments for any errors or miscoding during adjustment requests. PHD
has issued settlement letters to CBOs owing funds to OHA during Fall
2021. OHA will ensure that any unspent funds will be returned to the US
Department of Treasury promptly.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 149
Finding 2021-035:   Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen controls to ensure subaward information is accurately
communicated and subrecipient risk is assessed
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Management strengthen internal controls to ensure subaward information is
accurately communicated to all subrecipients. We also recommend
management ensure a risk assessment is completed for each subrecipient.
Status:    Corrective action was taken.
Finding 2021-036:   Oregon Housing and Community Services
Strengthen controls to ensure subaward information is communicated
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Significant Deficiency; Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management strengthen its existing controls over communications
to subrecipients to ensure all required information is communicated.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2021-037:   Oregon Housing and Community Services
Discontinue federal subawards to noncompliant subrecipients
21.019 Coronavirus Relief Fund
Subrecipient Monitoring
Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $4,426 (known); $415,997 (likely)
Initial Year:   2021
Recommendation:   Department management continue working with the Oregon legislature to find
alternate entities to serve migrant workers, consider non-federal funds for
service delivery until the identified subrecipient is compliant with program and
monitoring requirements, and reimburse the federal agency for unallowable
costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 150
Finding 2020-013:   Department of Human Services
Ensure performance data reports are complete and accurate
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Reporting
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2018
Recommendation:   The Department’s office of information services ensure systems used for
preparing the ACF-199 and ACF-209 reports provide the coding elements
necessary for accurate and complete reporting in compliance with
requirements. We recommend program management ensure performance data
reports submitted are complete and accurate.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) will develop a workgroup
consisting of policy analysts, business analysts, OIS (Legacy) staff, and
contracted Deloitte staff to complete a comprehensive analysis of the ONE
system report requirements, code, and federal instructions. The
comprehensive analysis will identify areas within both the 199 and 209 where
requirement and/or code are not in sync with the federal instructions. The
workgroup will then conduct work to bring all three areas into sync to ensure
the ONE system is producing accurate and complete federal reports 199 and
209. Through this process the workgroup will test data and complete data
analysis for validation. The Department is exploring ways to validate data at
quarterly submissions. Once a solution is identified, a procedure will be
implemented.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2022
Finding 2020-014:   Department of Human Services
Ensure work participation rate calculation uses verified and accurate data
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Special Tests and Provisions
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Initial Year:   2019
Recommendation:   TANF program management ensure the work participation rate is calculated
appropriately using verified and accurate participation data in adherence with
the department’s Work Verification Plan. We recommend program
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 151
management review their system of controls and identify where improvements
are needed to ensure compliance with the work verification plan.
Status:  Partial corrective action taken. The agency response is as follows:
The Engagement Specialist (ES) focus group began in May 2021. Work began by
creating a charter and identifying scope of work. Focus group was strategically
paused through October 2021. The scope of the focus group shifted priorities
to include the following: review information for ES positions, the skills,
knowledge, and attributes for the position, ensuring alignment of the
engagement model and completing a workload study. Work was not completed
to identify the specific trainings needed to allow ES’ to serve as subject matter
experts and provide support to Family Coaches and Case Aides. Policy will
conduct follow up by completing focus groups with Engagement Specialist and
provide resources so they can serve as subject matter experts at the local level
for both Family Coaches and Case Aides.
A checklist for contractors who are responsible for obtaining and entering JOBS
attendance was created and technical assistance was provided on December
17, 2021.
Anticipated Completion Date: December 31, 2022
Finding 2020-015:   Department of Human Services
Ensure appropriate information is used for determining benefit amounts
and eligibility
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) (93.558)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed;
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Eligibility
Material Weakness, Material Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $4,295 (known)
Initial Year:    2019
Recommendation:   Program management ensure client benefit payments are correctly calculated,
paid on behalf of eligible individuals, and documentation is maintained to
support eligibility decisions and benefit calculations. We also recommend
program management correct the identified cases and reimburse the federal
agency for any amounts claimed for ineligible cases.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 152
Finding 2020-017:   Department of Human Services
Subrecipient monitoring controls should be strengthened to include review
of financial records
Special Programs for the Aging – Title IIII, Part B (93.044)
Special Programs for the Aging – Title III, Part C (93.045)
Nutrition Services Incentive Program (93.053)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management strengthen existing controls by implementing
procedures that include review of financial records supporting expenditures
submitted for reimbursement.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-018:   Department of Human Services/Oregon Health Authority
Improve documentation and controls over client eligibility
Medicaid Cluster (93.777, 93.778)
Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $16,500 (known)
Initial Year:    2017
Recommendation:   Department and authority management strengthen controls to perform timely
eligibility redeterminations and provide periodic training to caseworkers to
reduce the risk of administrative errors. We also recommend management
implement corrections in the ONE system to address the weaknesses identified
in verifying income. Management should also review the entire duration of the
claim identified to determine if there are additional questioned costs from
previous years. Additionally, management should reimburse the federal agency
for unallowable costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 153
Finding 2020-021:   Oregon Health Authority
Strengthen review over costs charged to the program
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) (93.767)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable Costs/Cost Principles; Matching
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $342,566 (known)
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Authority management strengthen controls over review to ensure transactions
are adequately supported and the federal financial participation rate is correctly
applied. Additionally, we recommend the authority reimburse the federal agency
for unallowable costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-022:   Oregon Health Authority
Improve documentation and controls over client eligibility
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) (93.767)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Eligibility
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $25,429 (known)
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Authority management strengthen controls by providing periodic training to
eligibility staff to reduce the risk of administrative errors. This training should
ensure eligibility staff know how to verify and document income support. In
addition, management should review benefits and program eligibility related to
cases identified with questioned costs to ensure proper funding within CHIP
and other applicable federal programs and should reimburse the federal ag ency
for unallowable costs.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 154
Finding 2020-023:   Oregon Health Authority
Improve documentation for provider eligibility determinations and
revalidations
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) (93.767)
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Authority management strengthen controls over provider eligibility
determinations and revalidations to ensure maintenance of updated agreements
and disclosure statements in accordance with federal regulations and ensure all
databases are checked timely.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
For the first item noted in this finding the validation box was missed due to
staff error and as of February 2021, OHA obtained an updated disclosure
statement and verified the death master file for the managing employee. The
ongoing corrective action plan is already in place but was implemented after
this provider was enrolled. To ensure current and future required validations
are completed accurately and timely, the State pulls the missed validation
report monthly seeking validations which were missed by enrollment staff.
Validations which were missed are remediated. The missed validation reports
have been pulled and worked monthly since April 2019 and will continue.
For the second item noted in this finding OHA contacted both providers to
obtain the missing documentation. As of March 1, 2021, OHA obtained a
completed disclosure statement with required managing employee details from
one of these providers. The second provider must complete the revalidation
process by submitting a managing employee. This provider requested and was
granted an extension. The Provider Enrollment Unit anticipates receiving
information and completing revalidation by April 30, 2021. Should the provider
fail to revalidate by the deadline, they will be inactivated as a Medicaid
provider.
For the third item noted in this finding OHA obtained a signed provider
enrollment agreement and completed disclosure statement from one of these
providers as of March 1, 2021. While the second provider failed to comply and is
in the process of having their Medicaid participation inactivated.
For the fourth item noted in this finding OHA obtained a completed disclosure
statement for this provider as of March 1, 2021. The provider submitted the
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 155
information prior to the close of the audit and prior to the March 31, 2021
revalidation deadline.
For the fifth item noted in this finding OHA obtained signed provider enrollment
agreements and disclosure statements from five of the six providers as of
March 1, 2021. The remaining provider failed to comply and is in the process of
having their Medicaid participation inactivated. These providers are also
currently going through the revalidation process and will all be required to
provide updated enrollment agreement and disclosure forms.
The State is in the process of revalidating these providers but has been
delayed due to the federal COVID-19 Disaster Relief 1135 waiver. The waiver
allows revalidation to be delayed for providers that were due during the public
health emergency. Federal guidelines state these revalidations must be
completed within six months after the end of the public health emergency for
compliance. To meet these requirements, OHA has begun revalidations and is
on track to complete this work by the end of the PHE plus six months, the time
granted to back in compliance by CMS. The ongoing corrective action plan is
already in place. Since 2019, the provider revalidation process mirrored the
provider enrollment process by requiring the submission of an enrollment
agreement and disclosure statements. Providers will not be enrolled or
revalidated without the managing employee information, signed provider
enrollment agreements or disclosure statements.
All missing provider documents were received and one provider was end dated
because they failed to respond by August 31, 2021.
Finding 2020-025:   Department of Human Services
Improve controls over copay and child care hour calculations and multiple
provider copays
Child Care Development Fund Cluster (93.575, 93.596)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $10,241 (known); $1,354,980 (likely)
Initial Year:    2017
Recommendation:   Department management ensure a client’s monthly copay and childcare hours
are correctly calculated, and provider addresses are updated timely. In addition,
in situations with multiple providers, the department should seek
reimbursement from a client when the client copay is not met as the primary
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 156
provider did not provide care. We also recommend department management
reimburse the federal agency for unallowable costs.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
• Child Care Program will issue a policy transmittal to all staff
determining ERDC eligibility providing information on the importance of
calculating both child care hours and copay correctly based on current
Family Service Guide’s instruction.
• Direct Pay Unit (DPU) manager and lead will provide a refresher training
to DPU representatives to update provider address information
correctly.
• Child Care Program will provide case findings information to the Office
of Payment and Accuracy and Recovery (OPAR) for recoupment
purposes.
Finding 2020-027:   Department of Human Services
Investigate fraud referral cases and conduct other fraud detection
activities
Child Care Development Fund Cluster (93.575, 93.596)
Special Tests and Provisions
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management implement controls to ensure actions listed in
Oregon’s CCDF State Plan are accurate and occurring. We also recommend
department management timely investigate its fraud referral cases in order to
recover improper payments.
Status: Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 157
Finding 2020-028:   Department of Education
Improve controls to ensure expenditures are liquidated by federally
mandated date
Child Care Development Fund Cluster (93.575, 93.596)
Period of Performance
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $1,452,166 (known)
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management review and revise how it relies on the accounting
system coding to ensure payments are liquidated by federally mandated dates.
We also recommend department management reimburse the 2018 grant
award.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-029:   Department of Education
Improve controls over expenditures
Child Care Development Fund Cluster (93.575, 93.596)
Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Questioned Costs: $40,282 (known); $688,610 (likely)
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management improve its review of timesheets, ensure position
descriptions are completed and retained, and strengthen its review of data
entry. We also recommend department management reimburse the federal
agency for unallowable costs.
Status:   Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
ODE has implemented Workday for storage of signed position descriptions.
Human Resources has provided additional training and communication to
managers to reinforce the requirement for managers to electronically approve
all timesheets, and any exceptions require a manually signed form to be
maintained in a central directory for documentation. The Early Learning
Division (ELD) human resources team is continuing to work with the budget
team to document a procedure for reviewing position descriptions to ensure
alignment of duties and cost allocations of federal funds for all ELD employees.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 158
Finding 2020-030:   Oregon Military Department
Strengthen controls to ensure financial reports are accurate and
adequately supported by accounting records
National Guard Military Operations and Maintenance
Projects (12.401)
Reporting
Material Weakness, Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2019
Recommendation:   Department management ensure corrections are made in the accounting
records as errors are identified and consider implementing the use of additional
data fields within the accounting system to promote accurate federal
reporting. Finally, we recommend the department separately account for non-
federal expenditures by federal award.
Status:  Corrective action taken.
Finding 2020-033:   Oregon Department of Emergency Management
Fully implement subrecipient risk assessments
Disaster Grants – Public Assistance (Presidentially Declared) (97.036)
Subrecipient Monitoring
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management continue to implement and document its risk
assessments process for each subrecipient.
Status: Partial corrective action was taken. The agency response is as follows:
• Management within the Oregon Department of Emergency
Management have assigned Grant Accountants to review/document all
open awards from last year along with all new awards obligated this
year. On or before October 1, 2022, risk assessments will be sent to all
new, ongoing, and any awards without a risk assessment on file for
completion and return by December 1, 2022. ODEM has identified a
single internal POC to track and coordinate all outgoing and incoming
assessments and to track missing requests for follow-up. Ongoing
accountant turnover has delayed final development of the policies and
procedures, but we are hoping to have in place by 31 January 2023 for
the upcoming calendar year.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 159
• For future Prior Year Audit Findings reports, this finding should be
associated with the Oregon Department of Emergency Management
(ODEM). ODEM became an independent state agency effective July 1,
2022 as required by HB2927 (2021 Session). OMD would recommend
that DAS and Secretary of State confirm corrective action finalization
with ODEM senior management.
Finding 2020-034:   Oregon Department of Emergency Management
Improve accuracy of quarterly performance reporting
Disaster Grants – Public Assistance (Presidentially Declared) (97.036)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency, Noncompliance
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management improve existing controls to ensure quarterly
performance reports are complete and accurate prior to report submission.
Status: Corrective action was taken.
Finding 2020-038:   Department of Human Services
Strengthen controls over program expenditures
Rehabilitation Services – Vocational Rehabilitation
Grants to States (84.126)
Activities Allowed or Unallowed; Allowable Costs/Cost Principles
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management review policies and procedures surrounding
documentation and approval of transactions, and provide additional staff
training on processes involved, including verification of signature authority
during the invoice review process.
Status:   Corrective action taken.
State of Oregon
Schedule of Prior Year Findings
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 160
Finding 2020-039:   Oregon Business Development Department
Document review of the annual performance and evaluation reports
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) (14.228)
Reporting
Significant Deficiency
Initial Year:    2020
Recommendation:   Department management document review procedures that are sufficient to
ensure accurate reports are submitted. We also recommend department
management maintain evidence of reviews performed.
Status: Corrective action taken.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 161
Summaries of Related Audit Reports Issued by the
Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division
Summaries of selected performance and information technology audit reports issued during 202 2 are
included here for informational purposes as subjects may relate to federal programs administered in
Oregon.
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER: Timely Notification of Inpatient Hospital Stays Could Help Reduce
Improper Medicaid Payments; Report 2021-37
REPORT DATE: December 2021
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  The purpose of this audit was to determine if the Oregon Health Authority (OHA)
was appropriately processing claims for ancillary services when Medicaid clients are in an extended,
inpatient hospital stay. According to the federal Office of Management and Budget, the Medicaid
program is at risk of issuing significant improper payments. In 2020, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) estimated the national improper payment rate for Medicaid was 21%,  which
represents about $86 billion. Improper payments are not necessarily indicative of fraud. These are
payments that did not meet statutory, regulatory, administrative, or other legal requirements.
Overpayments, underpayments, fraud, waste, and abuse are all considered improper payments. The
federal government estimates health care expenditures will increase by 30% from 2019 to 2024. OHA
estimates the cost of health care in Oregon is projected to grow faster than the state’s economy. Due
to the size and dollar amounts that flow into this program, it is important the state take steps to
reduce improper payments.
As the state Medicaid agency, OHA is responsible for all aspects of Oregon’s Medicaid program. OHA
has the difficult task of managing service delivery for vulnerable populations while balancing the need
to be prudent and efficient with state resources.
We found OHA lacks timely notification of inpatient hospital stays, which results in some claims being
paid when services were not provided because the Medicaid client was in the hospital. Our testing
identified $52,344 in improper payments made to providers who billed for services that were likely not
provided while Medicaid clients were in the hospital. We also identified approximately $1.6 million in
other claims that are at high risk of being improper.
What We Found
1. OHA lacks timely notification of inpatient hospital stays. This results in some claims being paid
when services were not provided because the Medicaid client was in the hospital.
2. Our testing of 25 hospital inpatient stays identified $52,344 in improper payments made to
providers not associated with the hospital who likely did not provide services. Approximately
$1.6 million in additional payments were identified as high risk of being dee med improper. The
testing focused on three areas generally not allowed during a hospital stay: in -home services,
non-emergency medical transportation (NEMT), and private duty nursing.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 162
a. In-home services are provided to clients with disabilities and are intended to keep
clients in their home and out of facilities. Our testing found $49,875 in improper
payments, representing 42 claims. We estimate approximately $1.3 million in other in -
home service claims that are at high risk of being improper.
b. Our testing found $1,644 in improper payments across 73 NEMT claims. We estimate
$211,507 in other NEMT claims that are at a high risk of being improper.
c. Our testing found $825 in improper payments over three private duty nursing claims.
We estimate $5,982 in other private duty nursing claims that are at a high risk of being
improper.
What We Recommend
In order to comply with Medicaid program requirements, we recommend OHA:
1. Reimburse the federal government for the federal portion of the identified improper payment
amount.
In order to reduce the risk of improper payments, we recommend OHA:
2. Develop and implement cost-effective controls that would prevent or detect improper
payments for unallowable services while a Medicaid client is inpatient.
a. Consider ways timely notification of hospital admissions could be integrated efficiently
into claims processing.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 163
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER: Oregon Can Do More to Mitigate the Alarming Risk of Domestic
Terrorism and Violent Extremist Attacks; Report 2022-12
REPORT DATE: March 2022
RESULTS IN BRIEF: This advisory report suggests actions the Legislature, Oregon Department of
Justice (DOJ), and Oregon State Police (OSP) can take to mitigate the risks posed by domestic, violent
extremism statewide.
Over the past decade, Oregon witnessed the sixth-highest number of domestic violent extremism
incidents in the nation. That alarming trend manifest itself dramatically in 2020 both nationally and
within Oregon, culminating in violent attacks on the State Capitol Building on December 21, 2020  (see
photo on the cover page), and the U.S. Capitol Building on January 6, 2021.
For this advisory report, the Oregon Audits Division reviewed data and information from research and
interviews pertaining to domestic violent extremism and threat managemen t to identify gaps in
Oregon’s statutes, rules, and practices. Addressing these gaps could help the state mitigate the risk of
future domestic violent extremism incidents. We focused on five areas of review: state governance,
insider threat, critical infrastructure, Urban Area Securities Initiative grants, and public awareness.
The impact of domestic terrorism and violent extremism extends to all Oregonians and can affect
communities and individuals alike. The trauma caused by these incidents can have last ing effects and
may have a greater impact on communities already suffering from the COVID -19 pandemic, economic
loss, or racial bias in the case of racially or ethnically motivated extremism. Depending on the nature of
the incident, the continued trauma may impede the ability of individuals and communities to enjoy their
economic, social, and cultural rights.
Key issues and suggested actions
Lessons learned during 2020, a year unprecedented by the number of domestic violent extremist
incidents in Oregon and nationwide, can help improve risk mitigation, interagency planning, and
accountability — all areas that need strengthening based on our review.
Concerning risks related to governance of domestic violent extremism in Oregon:
1. Oregon has experienced one of the highest rates of domestic violent extremism in the country;
yet it is one of 16 states that does not have any legislation defining or criminalizing these
specific acts. Such legislation may provide the state with mechanisms to mitiga te future risk.
2. The Oregon Homeland Security Council is the advisory body for emergency management and
situational awareness of domestic violent extremism risks within the state. The council should
establish a statewide strategy with specific, measurable outcomes for countering violent
extremism risks and activities. In the absence of such a strategy and guidance, state oversight
agencies lack consistent and connected plans and outcome goals increasing the risk of gaps or
redundancies in the state approach for monitoring and addressing violent extremism risks.
3. The jurisdiction of law enforcement agencies often overlaps when working to mitigate or
respond to domestic violent extremism. In addition to potential inefficiencies, this situation can
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 164
result in confusion and miscommunication. The state can better position itself to meet this
threat by formalizing these relationships.
4. State critical infrastructure continues to be a high-risk target. While the state has worked
toward mitigating that risk, its infrastructure protection plan could be revised to consider the
evolving threat of domestic violent extremism.
5. Oregon currently receives federal funding through the Urban Area Security Initiative to improve
efforts to mitigate domestic violent extremism risk. The state should continue to identify and
leverage federal funding opportunities for programs to counter violent extremism and
encourage local entities to do the same when applicable.
Concerning state agency and law enforcement training on domestic violent extr emism:
6. Identifying individuals on the pathway to violence is critical to threat management. Current law
enforcement and state employee training is limited. Increased opportunities for training
statewide may increase effectiveness in identifying potential threats.
Concerning public awareness of the ongoing risks of risk of domestic violent extremism:
7. The lack of publicly available information regarding domestic violent extremist plots and
threats compounds the difficulty for policymakers to understand the nature and extent of the
threat. The state should create a system for public transparency of this information where
release does not violate the privacy of any individual or cause harm to state security.
8. The proliferation of extremist ideologies is protected by the first amendment of the U.S.
Constitution. The state cannot stifle those activities unless they result in violence. However,
the state can work to increase public awareness on the risks of violent extremism and the
methods used by extremist groups to target and recruit individuals online.
Suggested Actions
As this is an advisory report and not an audit, we are not making recommendations that require an
agency response. However, we suggest the following actions to help reduce the risk  domestic violent
extremism poses in Oregon. Some of these actions would likely require additional resources.
To enhance the state’s ability to mitigate the risk of domestic violent extremism and protect the
residents of Oregon, DOJ and OSP could: Document and implement code review processes to ensure
that only approved changes are made during application development.
• work with the Legislature to enact statute and rules defining and criminalizing domestic
terrorism and domestic violent extremism;
• collaborate with the Oregon Homeland Security Council to:
o establish a statewide strategy with specific, measurable outcomes for countering
violent extremism;
o establish dedicated plans to mitigate the risk of insider threat; and
o revise the Oregon Infrastructure Protection Plan to consider the evolving threat of
domestic violent extremism.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 165
• develop and implement processes to track progress, measure effectiveness, and report on
efforts to counter violent extremism activities;
• create an external reporting system of domestic violent extremism plots and incidents where
release of such information does not violate the privacy of any individual or cause harm to
state security; and
• formalize interagency and interjurisdictional working agreements to better facilitate the long -
term success of organizations to meet future threats.
To enhance the ability of communities statewide to identify and mitigate the risk of local domestic
violent extremism:
• OSP and DOJ can collaborate with the Department of Administrative Services to inc rease
employee training opportunities statewide, including:
o law enforcement training could be expanded to increase awareness of domestic violent
extremism indicators at state and local levels; and
o recurring training for other state employees on the risk, indicators, and how to report
potential insider threat could further reduce statewide risk.
• OSP can work with state and local partners to increase public awareness of the nature and
extent of the risk of violent extremism and the methods used by extremist groups to target
and recruit individuals online; and
• DOJ, OEM, and other state agencies should continue to identify and leverage federal funding
opportunities for funding programs to counter violent extremism and encourage local entities
to do the same when applicable.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 166
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER: Some Constraints Still Remain in Oregon’s Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program; Report 2022-17
REPORT DATE: June 2022
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  The purpose of this report is to follow up on the recommendations we made to the
Oregon Health Authority (OHA) as included in audit report 2018-40, “Constraints on Oregon’s
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) Limit the State’s Ability to Help Address Opioid Misuse
and Abuse.” The audit, which looked at ways Oregon could better leverage its PDMP to help with the
opioid epidemic, received the National State Auditor Association’s Excellence in Accountability Award
for 2020 because of its innovative approach and compelling findings and recommendations addressing
this critical public health issue.
Conclusion:  The misuse and abuse of opioids and risk of overdose remain a health threat nationally and
in Oregon. This involves both prescription opioid pain medications and illicit opioids.
Oregon has the highest rate of misuse of prescription opioids in the nation. Although Oregon is
dispensing fewer opioid prescriptions, it is still prescribing at a higher rate than the national average.
Additionally, there has been a steady increase in prescription stimulants. Oregon’s PDMP is an
important tool to help address prescription drug abuse and misuse, and improve health outcomes.
Since the original audit was issued in December 2018, PDMP staff have:
• maintained an ongoing partnership with health licensing boards to help get more required
prescribers registered with the PDMP, and the percentage of required prescribers registered
has increased to 85% as of mid-2021.
• included specialty information for every applicable registered prescriber in the PDMP and have
a process in place to add X-waivered DEA numbers for applicable prescribers.
Further, subsequent legislation allowed for some program changes and PDMP staff have:
• created prescriber report cards and medical director reports to provide comparative analysis of
prescribing at an individual and clinic level.
• collected and tracked prescriptions for gabapentin.
• collected diagnosis code as a part of the prescription information reported to the PDMP when
provided by prescribers to pharmacists.
Our follow-up work indicates Oregon could do more to promote and enhance the use of PDMP as a tool
to help combat drug epidemics. Oregon does not require all prescribers or pharmacists to use the
PDMP database prior to writing or dispensing controlled substance prescriptions. Al so, other states
allow their PDMP to share information proactively with stakeholders to help monitor and address
questionable prescription activity and collect some additional prescription information that could be
critical in preventing prescription drug abuse.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 167
REPORT TITLE AND NUMBER: The Pandemic’s Effects on Oregonians Exposed Risks and Highlighted
the Need to Modernize Oregon’s Unemployment Insurance System; Report 2022-21
REPORT DATE: July 2022
RESULTS IN BRIEF:  Unemployment insurance (UI) is a program delivered through a federal-state
partnership that began in 1935 with the Social Security Act. The program is funded at both the federal
and state level, with administrative funding amounts tied to economic conditions; when unemployment
is high, states receive more federal funding. Employers contribute most of the funding through payroll
taxes.
States develop and deliver their own unique UI program while following broader federal program
requirements. The program is administered in Oregon by the Oregon Employment Department (OED).
Each state also determines its own method for calculating weekly benefit amounts and the duration of
benefit coverage, with most states, including Oregon, offering up to 26 weeks of compensation. The
main purpose of unemployment insurance is twofold: provide temporary, partial wage replacement to
eligible unemployed workers, and help stabilize the economy during economic recessions.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused unprecedented increases in unemployment claims across the country.
Like many other states, Oregon struggled under this surge in claims and in setting up new, emergency
unemployment programs authorized by Congress. OED’s antiquated computer systems could not easily
handle the many program changes implemented during the pandemic and the agency’s phone-based
approach, while generally adequate in normal times, could not accommodate the wave of phone calls
OED received.
Even before the pandemic, OED struggled with meeting federal timeliness guidelines for making
complex claim decisions, through a process called adjudication. Until January 2022, the agency had only
met federal timeliness standards for job separation-related adjudications once since 2014. Reasons
include inefficient communication procedures and a lack of detailed monitoring of claims that need
further action. Additionally, the agency’s outdated mainframe IT system includes many anomalies and
data entry errors. The system is so antiquated, updating it to add more controls and functionality is
difficult and expensive. OED is currently in the process of designing and implementing a new IT system,
which is estimated to be completed in the spring of 2024.
State workforce agencies across the country, including OED, were overwhelmed by the surge of
pandemic-related UI claims. The agency’s inflexible computer systems could not be updated when
programs changed, and the phone system could not keep up with the extraordinary increase in calls
OED received. The agency also struggled to keep its published resources up to date wit h the many
legislative and UI program changes that occurred.
OED is already taking some steps to improve its communications, data system controls, and guidance,
but additional improvements could be made to improve adjudication timeliness, reduce the risk of
inconsistent determinations, and examine potential inequities. Establishing an ombuds office could also
help claimants navigate complex UI programs.
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 168
What We Found
1. Complex UI claims go through a process called adjudication, in which OED staff gather more
information to determine whether a claimant is eligible for benefits. Even before the pandemic,
the agency struggled to meet timeliness requirements to process these claims. The pandemic
and its resulting surge in claims only exacerbated the problem, causing some to wait months or
more than a year to receive benefits.
2. Delays were worsened by several inefficiencies in OED’s systems: a lack of formal policies to
monitor claims that need additional action; outdated procedures on how to contact involved
parties; and online resources that contained conflicting and difficult -to-find information.
3. Auditors found data anomalies in the agency’s current IT systems; however, the agency’s
antiquated and rigid IT systems make it difficult to add additional controls. OED’s ongoing IT
system modernization should address this, as well as help simplify how the agency
communicates with parties involved in UI claims.
4. Oregonians could benefit from an OED ombuds office to advocate for and help individuals
navigate the complex UI system.
5. Auditors identified some concerning demographic trends during the pandemic: adjudicated
claims for some groups, separated by race or by income, appeared to take longer on average
than for others. Though the cause of these trends was not determined, OED should continue to
track the data and develop strategies to reduce any disparities found.
What We Recommend
To improve adjudication timeliness and potential inequities, OED should:
1. Implement formal policies and procedures for oversight of adjudicated and suspended claims
and data systems;
a. Monitor the suspended claims list and adjudication data reports that identify claim files
that have not been reviewed within a set period;
2. Incorporate controls and functionality in the modernized IT system to:
a. Reduce data errors, such as illogical dates and manual entry errors;
b. Automatically flag claims that have not been reviewed within a set period;
c. Allow secure electronic communication methods and use claimants’ preferred method
of communication;
d. Allow individuals to securely upload documents and track the progress of their claim;
e. Continue to make communication available in languages other than English;
f. Provide accurate guidance, explanations, and tips for filling out claim applications;
Appendix A
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 169
3. Explore whether other state workforce agencies use texting to communicate with claimants
and consider offering texting as an option for claimants who prefer that contact method;
4. Consolidate UI information into one website with detailed, updated guidance and resour ces for
current and prospective claimants;
5. Establish a central repository for adjudicator guidance and assign a manager or lead worker to
regularly update that guidance;
6. Study the creation of an ombuds office to help claimants navigate the complexities of the UI
system and address unresolved claim issues, in consultation with the Governor’s Office and
other states; and
7. Continue gathering and analyzing OED data on inequities to identify and address the causes for
any confirmed inequities.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-21 | June 2023 | page 170
About the Audit
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor
of Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected
Secretary of State and is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
branches of Oregon government. The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers,
agencies, boards and commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Audit Report Team
Teresa Furnish, CISA, Deputy Director
Sarah Anderson, CPA, Audit Manager
Amy John, CPA, Audit Manager
Kelly Olson, CPA, Audit Manager
Michelle Searfus, CPA, Audit Manager
Tracey Gates, CPA, Principal Auditor
Audit Team Leads
Alan Bell, MBA
Shelly Cardenas, CPA
Geoff Hill, CPA
Kari Mott, CPA, MBA
Michael Yamamoto
Hannah Creighton
Kalindi Devi-Dasi, CPA
Katie Hull
Janet Lowrey, CPA
Austin Moore
Michelle Rock, CPA
Synthea Russell, CPA
This report is intended to promote the best possible
management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits