For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
A component unit of the State of Oregon
2 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 3
OREGON
PERS
PVBLIC EMPLOYEES RETl~EMENT SVSTEN
--•--
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
A component unit of the State of Oregon
Kevin Olineck I Director
Richard Horsford I Chief Financial Officer
4 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 5
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTORY SECTION
9 Letter of Transmittal
14 Public Employees Retirement Board
16 Organizational Chart
17 GFOA Certificate of Achievement
18 Public Pension Standards Award
19  Mission, Core Values, and Operating Principles
FINANCIAL SECTION
23 Independent Auditor’s Report
27 Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Basic Financial Statements:
40 Statement of Fiduciary Net Position – Pension and Other
Postemployment Plans
42 Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position – Pension
and Other Postemployment Plans
44 Statement of Net Position – Proprietary Fund
45 Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net
Position – Proprietary Fund
46 Statement of Cash Flows – Proprietary Fund
47 Notes to the Financial Statements
Required Supplementary Information:
96 Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability/(Asset) and
Related Ratios – Defined Benefit Pension Plan
96 Schedule of Investment Returns – Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
98 Schedule of Defined Benefit Pension Plan Employer
Contributions
100 Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB (Asset) and Related
Ratios – OPEB Plan – RHIA
100 Schedule of Investment Returns – OPEB Plan – RHIA
101 Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB Liability/(Asset) and
Related Ratios – OPEB Plan – RHIPA
101 Schedule of Investment Returns – OPEB – RHIPA
102  Schedule of OPEB RHIA Employer Contributions
104 Schedule of OPEB RHIPA Employer Contributions
106 Schedule of Claims Development Information
Other Supplementary Information:
108 Schedule of Plan Net Position – Defined Benefit Pension
Plan
110 Schedule of Changes in Plan Net Position – Defined
Benefit Pension Plan
112 Schedule of Administrative Expenses – All Funds
113 Schedule of Payments to Consultants and Contractors
114 Summary of Investment Fees, Commissions, and
Expenses
INVESTMENT SECTION
119 Chief Investment Officer’s Report
123 Description of Investment Objectives and Policies
124 Investment Results
125 OIC Target and Actual Investment Allocation
126 List of Largest Assets Held
127 Schedule of Fees and Commissions
127 Schedule of Broker Commissions
128 Investment Summary
ACTUARIAL SECTION
131 Actuary’s Certification Letter
137 Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
155 Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
167 Summary of Plan Provisions
STATISTICAL SECTION
179 Statistical Notes
Financial Statement Schedules by Fiscal Year:
180 Additions by Source – Retirement Programs
181 Deductions by Type – Retirement Programs
182 Changes in Fiduciary Net Position – Retirement
Programs
183 A
dditions by Source – OPEB
184 Deductions by Type – OPEB
185 Changes in Fiduciary Net Position – OPEB
Financial Statement Schedules by Calendar Year:
186 Additions by Source – Retirement Programs
187 Deductions by Type – Retirement Programs
188 Changes in Fiduciary Net Position – Retirement
Programs
189 Additions by Source – OPEB
190 Deductions by Type – OPEB
191 Changes in Fiduciary Net Position – OPEB
Other Statistical Schedules:
192 Schedule of Earnings and Crediting
192 Schedule of Benefit Expenses by Type – Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
192 Schedule of Average OPEB Benefits for Retirement
Health Insurance Account
192 Schedule of Average OPEB Benefits for Retiree Health
Insurance Premium Account
193 Schedule of Average Defined Benefit Pension Payments
194 Schedule of Benefit Recipients by Benefit Type
194 Schedule of Retirement System Membership at
December 31 in Five-Year Increments
195 Schedule of Principal Participating Employers
196 Schedule of Participating Employers
6 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Introductory
Section
8 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 9
Public Employees Retirement System
Headquarters
11410 S.W. 68th Parkway, Tigard, OR
Mailing Address:
P.O. Box 23700
Tigard, OR 97281-3700
888-320-7377
TTY (503) 603-7766
www.oregon.gov/pers
December 1, 2023
To the Members of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System Public Employees Retirement Board:
We are pleased to present the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR) of the Oregon Public Employees
Retirement System (PERS, System or Agency) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. This report includes all
funds over which the Public Employees Retirement Board (Board) exercises authority. These funds were
established to provide retirement, death, and disability benefits and other postemployment benefits (OPEB) to
members; administer retiree health insurance programs; and oversee the state-sponsored deferred compensation
program. As of June 30, 2023, PERS provides services to 897 employers and more than 405,000 active, inactive,
and retired members and beneficiaries.
The ACFR is intended to fulfill the legal requirements of Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) 238.630. PERS management
is responsible for both the accuracy of the data and the completeness and fairness of the presentation, including all
disclosures.
Macias Gini & O’Connell LLP (MGO) has audited the accompanying financial statements in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. The independent auditor’s report is included in this
report.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Included in this report is a section titled Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A). This section provides a
narrative introduction, overview, and analysis to accompany the basic financial statements. The letter of transmittal
is designed to complement the MD&A and should be read in conjunction with it. We would like to direct your
attention to the MD&A that begins on page 27.
Oregon
Tina Kotek, C,overnor
10 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Financial Information
The financial statements contained in this report have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America, also known as generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
as set forth in the principles established by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB), including all
effective GASB pronouncements, and in conformance with the guidelines for financial reporting developed by the
Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada (GFOA).
Management of the System assumes full responsibility for the completeness and reliability of all the information
presented in this report. To provide a reasonable basis for making these representations, management of the System
has (1) established internal controls designed to protect the System’s assets from loss, theft, or misuse, and (2)
compiled sufficient reliable information for the preparation of the included financial statements. Because the cost of
internal controls should not exceed their effectiveness, management has developed controls that provide reasonable,
rather than absolute, assurance that the financial statements contained in this report are free of material
misstatements. As management, we assert that, to the best of our knowledge and belief, this financial report is
complete and reliable in all material aspects.
Factors Affecting Economic Condition
The economic condition of the System is primarily affected by investment earnings. A comparative analysis of
investment rates of return is presented in Table 9 of the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of this report.
FUNDING
The System is funded through contributions and investment earnings. For judges, the contribution is set at 7.0% of
covered salary. Employer contributions are established by actuarial valuations conducted biennially in odd-numbered
calendar years. The System’s funding objective is to meet long-term benefit promises through contributions that fund
benefits as they accrue. An adequate contribution level, when combined with investment earnings, will result in the full
funding of benefits as they come due. If the level of funding is adequate, the ratio of assets accumulated to total
liabilities will increase, and more income will be available for investment. Prudent investment of assets, and returns on
those investments, may increase the funding base and allow for a more stable employer contribution rate. As of the
December 31, 2022, actuarial valuation, the System has a funded ratio of 79% for the defined benefit pension plan it
administers, including employer side accounts, and a 73% funded ratio excluding employer side accounts. Public
pension funds' average funding ratio was 77.8% in 2022, with the majority of pensions' revenue (68%) coming from
investment returns, according to an annual study by the National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems
(NCPERS).
A
ll members, apart from judges, contribute 6.0% of salary to the Individual Account Program (IAP), an individual
account-based program under the PERS tax-qualified governmental plan for all PERS members, established in 2004.
Beginning July 1, 2020, Senate Bill 1049 required a portion of most members’ contributions to their IAP accounts to be
redirected to their new Employee Pension Stability Account (EPSA) to help fund the cost of their future pension
benefits. For Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan (OPSRP) members, the redirected amount is 0.75% of their IAP
contribution, and for Tier One and Tier Two members, the redirected amount is 2.5% of their IAP contribution. In 2023,
only members who earned more than $3,570 a month were subject to a portion of their IAP contributions being
redirected to the EPSA.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 11
INVESTMENTS
The Oregon Investment Council (OIC) has statutory authority (ORS 293.701) to establish policies for the investment
and reinvestment of the System’s funds. The System’s long-term investment strategy is designed to capitalize on
investment return while protecting the principal. The OIC works to strategically allocate assets in the System’s portfolio.
The target investment portfolio mix at fair value as of June 30, 2023, was 27.5% public equity, 20.0% private equity,
25.0% debt securities, 12.5% real estate, 7.5% real assets, and 7.5% diversifying strategies. In addition to approved
asset classes, target asset allocation ranges, and rebalancing policies, the OIC further safeguards the System’s
investment portfolio through use of an independent custodian, defined limits on delegated authority, and independent
audits. The OIC uses external portfolio managers, employing both passive (indexed) and active investment strategies.
The portfolio is broadly diversified among equities, debt securities, real estate, and private equities, with additional
diversification achieved through domestic and international investing. System securities are held by State Street
Corporation.
The System’s Regular Investment Portfolio (Portfolio) experienced a rate of return of 3.2% in fiscal year 2023. This
compares with a rate of return of 6.3% for fiscal year 2022. The Portfolio’s trailing 10-year return was 8.3%.
Descriptions of OIC policies regarding diversification, performance objectives, fees, and asset allocation are found on
page 123.
Major Initiatives
SENATE BILL 1049 (SB 1049)
SB 1049 was signed into law by the Governor on June 11, 2019. The challenge for PERS has been to continue to
provide our members and employers with uninterrupted service while working through the intricacies of
implementation.
The Agency developed an overall implementation approach to tackle each element of SB 1049. This approach is to
manage this as one comprehensive program with the following five individual projects:
Project     Effective Date
Employer Programs 7/1/2019
Salary Limit 1/1/2020
Work After Retirement  1/1/2020
Member Redirect  7/1/2020
Member Choice 1/1/2021
Technical Debt 7/1/2021
As of June 30, 2023, PERS fully finished and closed the Employer Programs, Salary Limit, Member Choice, and Work
After Retirement projects. The Technical Debt and Member Redirect projects have an expected completion date of
June 2025. PERS received funding for these projects for the 2023-25 biennium.
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
PERS continues to evolve its outcome-based management system (POBMS) to improve operational performance and
organizational alignment. This process-based system integrates problem solving and decision making with active
engagement from the front-line staff who perform daily work.
T
he 2023–2028 PERS Strategic Plan was approved by the PERS Board to reflect six strategic priorities. Each priority
12 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
has several areas of focus and specific, achievable goals and objectives. The six strategic priorities are:
1. Organizational Management and Development.
2. Member Services and Communications.
3. Data Consistency.
4. Information Technology.
5. Financial Management.
6. Risk Management.
For each of the strategic priorities, PERS is using existing strategic and operational planning functions to prioritize and
allocate resources. We are using a variety of methods to implement each priority, including problem solving, project
management, breakthrough initiatives, and integration into core business practices. We have identified specific
performance metrics to track our progress.
Supporting the Agency’s strategic priorities are six core operating processes and six core supporting processes. Each
process has an owner, subprocesses, and outcome measures to monitor and document progress. We hold quarterly
target review meetings to review progress and identify areas for improvement.
More information on the 2023–2028 PERS Strategic Plan can be found on our website at:
https://www.oregon.gov/pers/Documents/Strategic-Plan.pdf
INFORMATION SECURITY AND CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS
The Agency has established a continuity management program, which encompasses our Continuity of Operations,
Business Recovery, and Disaster Recovery plans. We will continue to flesh out the plans and build a more robust
continuity management program.
Like continuity management, information security is one of the foundational initiatives the Agency has in place. This
ensures that the data and personal information we maintain are secure. Working collaboratively with the State
Enterprise Security Office, the staff made significant strides in enhancing our information security program in fiscal year
2023.
MEMBER AND EMPLOYER SATISFACTION SURVEYS
PERS’ 2023 Member Satisfaction Survey results show a nearly 4% increase in member satisfaction from 2022,
continuing last year’s trend of increasing member satisfaction. Overall quality of service was rated at 88.8% in 2023, up
from 85.1%. This year, a concerted communications campaign was launched to increase email subscriptions, which
has produced a marked increase in surveys completed.
Employers reported a satisfaction rating of 86.9% in 2023, up from 86.0% in 2022.
Awards and Acknowledgments
CERTIFICATE OF ACHIEVEMENT
Government Finance Officers Association of the United States and Canada (GFOA) awarded a Certificate of
Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting to PERS for its annual comprehensive financial report for the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2022. This was the 32nd consecutive year that the government has achieved this prestigious
award. In order to be awarded a Certificate of Achievement, a government must publish an easily readable and
efficiently organized annual comprehensive financial report. This report must satisfy both generally accepted
accounting principles and applicable legal requirements.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 13
A Certificate of Achievement is valid for a period of one year only. We believe that our current annual comprehensive
financial report continues to meet the Certificate of Achievement Program’s requirements, and we are submitting it to
GFOA to determine its eligibility for another certificate.
PUBLIC PENSION STANDARDS AWARD
The Public Pension Coordinating Council (PPCC) awarded the 2023 Public Pension Standards Award to PERS for its
plan funding and administration.
The PPCC is a coalition of three associations representing public pension funds that cover most public employees in
the United States. The associations are as follows: the National Association of State Retirement Administrators
(NASRA), the National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems (NCPERS), and the National Council on
Teacher Retirement (NCTR). Public pension standards are intended to reflect minimum expectations for public
retirement system management and administration. They also serve as benchmarks by which all defined benefit public
plans are measured.
This is the 21
st year the PPCC has offered the award to public retirement systems and the 20th consecutive year PERS
has applied for and received the award.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The information contained in this report is used to make management decisions, demonstrate stewardship of the
assets entrusted to the System, and comply with legal and accounting provisions. The staff strives to provide reliable
and complete information for these purposes. The compilation of this report reflects the combined efforts of the PERS
Financial Services Division. This report is available on the PERS website at:
https
://www.oregon.gov/pers/Pages/Financials/Actuarial-Financial-Information.aspx
A link to this document is emailed to all PERS employers. Summary financial information and the website link are also
reported in the PERS newsletter, Perspectives, which is distributed to active and retired members.
We would like to thank the PERS Board and staff, participating employers, the Oregon Investment Council, the Office
of the State Treasurer, and all others working on behalf of the System for their time, commitment, support, and hard
work. We are grateful for their continued support and assistance.
Respectfully submitted,
Kevin Olineck  Richard Horsford
Director Chief Financial Officer
~7 ?7Jl>-~
14 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Public Employees Retirement Board
The Oregon Legislature has delegated authority to the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS) Board of
Trustees (Board) to administer the PERS System. The board is composed of five trustees who administer retirement
(both service retirement and disability retirement), death, and retiree health insurance benefits. PERS also
administers the Oregon Savings Growth Plan (OSGP), a deferred compensation program for state and local
government employees.
All members of the PERS Board are appointed by the state Governor and confirmed by the state Senate. The
Governor designates the chairperson.
Statute specifies that PERS Board membership must consist of three people with experience in business
management, pension management, or investing who are not members of the PERS system; one person who is
either an employee of the state in a management position or a person who holds an elective office in the governing
body of a participating public employer other than the state; and one person representing public employees and
retirees.
As of June 30, 2023, the three PERS Board members representing business management, pension management,
or investing are Sadhana Shenoy (board chair), Stephen Buckley (vice-chair), and Jardon Jaramillo. John Scanlan
was appointed to represent public employees and retirees. Suzanne Linneen was appointed to represent public
employers. Terms for each member are staggered.
SADHANA SHENOY (BOARD CHAIR)
Sadhana Shenoy has spent more than five years in the mobility as a service (MaaS) space. She was the chief
financial officer and chief operations officer of Moovel, a transit technology company, and she held this position as
the company developed from start-up to acquisition and into growth. She started her career as a software engineer
working with databases and children’s software. She then moved to the nonprofit sector, working on boards within
the environmental (Sierra Club), educational (Montessori School of Beaverton), and legal (CRAG Law Center)
areas. Ms. Shenoy is a charter and board member of TiE Oregon (The Indus Entrepreneurs) and of TYE Oregon
(TiE Young Entrepreneurs). She enjoys angel investing in exciting new ideas and promoting youth entrepreneurship.
Ms. Shenoy holds bachelor’s degrees in accounting and business administration and a master’s degree in computer
science. She is a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) in Oregon.
STEPHEN BUCKLEY (VICE-CHAIR)
Stephen Buckley was a partner at the Portland, Oregon, law firm Brownstein Rask LLP prior to his retirement on
June 30, 2019. For more than 30 years, Mr. Buckley served as legal counsel for boards of trustees of private sector
health and welfare plans and defined benefit, defined contribution, and 401(k) pension plans in Washington,
Oregon, and California. Mr. Buckley was a frequent speaker at employee benefit plan conferences sponsored by the
International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans. Mr. Buckley earned his bachelor’s degree in political science
from Colorado State University and his Juris Doctorate degree from Willamette University College of Law.
JOHN SCANLAN
John Scanlan was a teacher for 29 years and retired in 2021. He taught English language arts to students in grades
6 to 12 in three districts; was an adjunct professor at Eastern Oregon University (EOU); co-directed the Oregon
Writing Project at EOU; and coordinated the Pendleton School District Outdoor School, the longest continuously
operating outdoor school program east of the Cascades. Mr. Scanlan also served as president of the Oregon
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 15
Council of Teachers of English, frequently presented at council conferences, and has been published in the council's
peer-reviewed Oregon English Journal. He has been active in the Oregon Education Association, including serving
as a local building representative, treasurer, negotiation team leader, president, and board member.
JARDON JARAMILLO
Jardon Jaramillo serves as Senior Director of Investor Relations, Treasury, and Risk Management at Portland
General Electric, communicating and managing financial results. He previously worked as the Director of
Compensation and Benefits from 2013 to 2016. As director, he was responsible for managing the company’s defined
benefit pension plan as well as overseeing health care programs for all of PGE’s employees. Before joining PGE,
Mr. Jaramillo was a manager with Deloitte in the M&A Transactions Services consulting group. He spent his early
career at Deloitte in the audit and assurance space. Mr. Jaramillo enjoys contributing to solutions to equity issues in
the community and serves as vice chair of the Board of Metropolitan Family Services.
Mr. Jaramillo received an MBA from the Anderson School at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a
bachelor’s degree in economics from Northwest Nazarene University. He is a CPA licensed in Oregon.
SUZANNE LINNEEN
Suzanne Linneen has served as the City of Hillsboro’s finance director since 2009. She started working for the city
in finance in 1995 and participated in a lot of change and growth in the city during that time. Originally from the Los
Angeles area, Ms. Linneen attended the University of California, Santa Barbara; earned a bachelor’s degree in
business economics; and worked as an auditor for Deloitte & Touche in Century City, California, before moving to
Oregon. She is a CPA and brings vast experience in accounting, budgeting, financial planning, and management to
her role with the PERS Board.
16 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System Consultants
Actuary Legal Counsel Auditor
Milliman, Inc. Oregon Department of Justice  Macias Gini & O’Connell LLP
Insurance Consultant Medical Advisor Investments
Butler Partners & Associates LLC F. William Miller, MD The Oregon State Treasury is the
investment officer for the State of Oregon.
Investment brokers are reported in the
Schedule of Fees and Commissions on
page 127.
Public Employees Retirement Board
Kevin Olineck
Director I I
Katie Brogan Heather Case
Yvette Elledge-Rhodes Executive Assistant Senior Polic y Ad vis or
Deputy Director
I I I I
Communications Sam Paris Richard Horsford Jordan Masanga Jason Stanley
Chief Operations Officer Chief Financial Officer Chief Information Officer Chief Compliance , Audit
I Risk Officer
&
Human Resource s I I I I
Calculations and Bud get, Fiscal Technical Policy Analysis and Analysis and I Benefit Pre pe ration Payroll Operations C omplia nee Section
Procure ment, I I I I Facilities &
Logistic s Data and Member Accounting and Enterprise
I Services Cash Transactions App lication Securi ty and Risk
Strategic and I I I I Operationa I
Planning PERS Health Enterprise Content
I Insurance Program Financial Reporting Management Internal Aud it
Modernization I I
Progra m IT Support/ State Social
Securi ty Prag ram Enterprise
Architecture
I I
Oreg on Savings Dev Ops Grow th Plan
I
Business System
Analysis
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 17
Management would like to offer a special thank you to the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System Financial
Services Division for their ongoing work to earn this prestigious award.
• Financial Reporting Manager – Matthew Graves
• Financial Reporting Coordinator – Pat Donegan
• Senior Investment Accountant – Michiru Farney
•
Government Finance Officers A~sociation
Certificate of
Achieven1ent
for Excellence
in Financial
Reporting
Presented to
Oregon Publi c E1nployees Retir e1nent Sys te1n
For its Annual Comprehen sive
Financial Report
For the Fiscal Year Ended
June 30, 2022
~ p. ~
Executive Direc.tor/CEO
18 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Public Pension Coordinating Council
Public Pension Standards Award
For Funding and Administration
2023
Presented to
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
In recognition of meeting professional standards for
plan funding and administration as
set forth in the Public Pension Standards.
Presented by the Public Pension Coordinating Council, a confederation of
National Association of State Retirement Administrators (NASRA)
National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems (NCPERS)
National Council on Teacher Retirement (NCTR)
Alan H. Winkle
Program Administrator
P CP C
tik~
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 19
MISSION
We serve the people of Oregon by administering public employee benefit
trusts to pay the right person the right benefit at the right time.
CORE VALUES
Accountability: We take ownership for our decisions, act ions, and outcomes.
Integrity: We inspire trust through transparency and ethical, sound judgment.
Service-Focus: We work together to meet the needs of others with
dependability, professiona lism, and respect.
@
OPERATING PRINCIPLES
Professional: We are responsive, respectful, and sensitive to the needs
of our members, employers, and staff.
Accurate: We ensure data integrity and prov ide consistent,
dependable information and benefits.
Judicious: We use sound judgment and prudent, principled decision-making
in upholding our fiduciary responsibility.
Vigilant: We are constantly vigilant and take ownership in the basic tenets of
information security: confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
20 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Financial
Section
22 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 23
·mco. 1
Certified
Public
Accountants
Independent Auditor's Report
To the Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
To the Public Employees Retirement Board of the
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Tigard, Oregon
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements
Opinions
We have audited the financial statements of the fiduciary activities and proprietary activities of the Oregon
Public Employees Retirement System (the System), a component unit of the State of Oregon, as of and for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, and the related notes to the financial statements, which collectively
comprise the System's basic financial statements as listed in the table of contents.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the respective
financial position of the fiduciary activities and proprietary activities of the Oregon Public Employees
Retirement System, as of June 30, 2023, and the respective changes in financial position, and, where
applicable, cash flows thereof for the fiscal year then ended in accordance with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinions
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States (Government Auditing Standards). Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit
of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are required to be independent of the System and to
meet our other ethical responsibilities , in accordance with the relevant ethical requirements relating to our
audit. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis
for our audit opinions.
Other Matter
Prior-Y ear Comparative Information
The financial statements include partial prior-year comparative information. Such information does not
include all of the information required to constitute a presentation in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America. Accordingly , such information should be read in
conjunction with the System's financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, from which
such partial information was derived.
Macias Gini & O'Connell LLP
500 Capitol Mall, Suite 2200
Sacrame nto, CA 9581 4
www .mgoc pa.com
24 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Report on Partial Comparative Information
We have previously audited the System' s 2022 financial statements, and we expressed unmodified audit
opinions on the financial statements in our report dated December 1, 2022. In our opinion, the partial
comparative information presented herein as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, is consistent,
in all material respects, with the audited financial statements from which it was derived.
Responsibilities of Management for the Financial Statements
The System' s management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial
statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America,
and for the design, implementation , and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair
presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, management is required to evaluate whether there are conditions or
events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the System' s ability to continue as a
going concern for twelve months beyond the financial statement date, including any currently known
information that may raise substantial doubt shortly thereafter.
Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor 's report that includes our
opinions . Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance and therefore is
not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards will
always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement
resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery,
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Misstatements are considered
material if there is a substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would influence the
judgment made by a reasonable user based on the financial statements.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards, we:
• Exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, and design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures
include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the System' s internal control. Accordingly, no such opinion is expressed.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall presentation of the
financial statements.
• Conclude whether, in our judgment , there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate ,
that raise substantial doubt about the System's ability to continue as a going concern for a
reasonable period of time.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 25
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit, significant audit findings, and certain internal control- related matters
that we identified during the audit.
Required Supplementary Information
Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America require that the management' s
discussion and analysis, the schedule of changes in net pension liability/(asset) and related ratios - defined
benefit pension plan, the schedule of investment returns - defined benefit pension plan, the schedule of
defined benefit pension plan employer contributions, the schedule of changes in net OPEB (asset) and
related ratios - OPEB Plan - RHIA, the schedule of investment returns - OPEB Plan - RHIA, the schedule
of changes in net OPEB liability/(asset) and related ratios - OPEB Plan - RHIP A, the schedule of
investment returns - OPEB Plan - RHIPA, the schedule of OPEB RHIA employer contributions, the
schedule of OPEB RHIPA employer contributions, and the schedule of claims development information,
as listed in the table of contents, be presented to supplement the basic financial statements. Such information
is the responsibility of management and, although not a part of the basic financial statements, is required
by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board who considers it to be an essential part of financial
reporting for placing the basic financial statements in an appropriate operational, economic, or historical
context. We have applied certain limited procedures to the required supplementary information in
accordance with GAAS, which consisted of inquiries of management about the methods of preparing the
information and comparing the information for consistency with management's responses to our inquiries,
the basic financial statements, and other knowledge we obtained during our audit of the basic financial
statements. We do not express an opinion or provide any assurance on the information because the limited
procedures do not provide us with sufficient evidence to express an opinion or provide any assurance.
Supplementary Information
Our audit was conducted for the purpose of forming opinions on the financial statements that collectively
comprise the System' s basic financial statements. The schedule of plan net position - defined benefit
pension plan, the schedule of changes in plan net position - defined benefit pension plan, the schedule of
administrative expenses - all funds, the schedule of payments to consultants and contractors, and the
summary of investment fees, commissions, and expenses (supplementary information) are presented for
purposes of additional analysis and are not a required part of the basic fmancial statements. Such
information is the responsibility of management and was derived from and relates directly to the underlying
accounting and other records used to prepare the basic financial statements. The information has been
subjected to the auditing procedures applied in the audit of the basic financial statements and certain
additional procedures, including comparing and reconciling such information directly to the underlying
accounting and other records used t o prepare the basic financial statements o r to the basic financial
statements themselves, and other additional procedures in accordance with GAAS. In our opinion, the
supplementary information, is fairly stated, in all material respects, in relation to the basic financial
statements as a whole.
Other Information
The System's management is responsible for the other information included in the annual comprehensive
financial report. The other information comprises the introductory, investment, actuarial, and statistical
sections but does not include the basic financial statements and our auditor's report thereon. Our opinions
on the basic financial statements do not cover the other information, and we do not express an opinion or
any form of assurance thereon.
26 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
In connection with our audit of the basic financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other
information and consider whether a material inconsistency exists between the other information and the
basic financial statements, or the other information otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based
on the work performed, we conclude that an uncorrected material misstatement of the other information
exists, we are required to describe it in our report.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards , we have also issued our report dated
December 1, 2023, on our consideration of the System's internal control over financial reporting and on
our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and
other matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control
over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral part of
an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the System's internal
contro l over financial reporting and compliance.
M~1~ G,i i OuMdl l_§p
Sacramento , California
December 1, 2023
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 27
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
This section presents management’s discussion and analysis of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement
System’s (PERS or the System) financial performance during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. It is a
narrative overview and analysis that we present in conjunction with the Letter of Transmittal included in the
Introductory section of this Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR). It should also be read in
conjunction with PERS’ basic financial statements, as presented in this report.
PERS is primarily responsible for administering retirement benefits, health insurance benefits, and
supplemental retirement savings plans. PERS comprises six funds: a defined benefit pension plan, an
individual account based program under the PERS tax-qualified governmental plan, two other post
employment benefit (OPEB) plans, a deferred compensation plan, and a proprietary fund.
OVERVIEW OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION
This section provides an introduction to, and overview of, the basic financial statements, which comprise the
Fund Financial Statements and Notes to the Basic Financial Statements. Collectively, this information presents
the combined net position restricted for pension benefits, OPEB, individual account based program, and
deferred compensation, along with the restricted and unrestricted net position of the proprietary fund
administered by PERS as of June 30, 2023. It also summarizes the combined changes in net position
restricted for pension benefits, other employee benefits and OPEB, the changes in restricted and unrestricted
net position, and the cash flows of the proprietary fund for the fiscal year then ended, along with an actuarial
measurement of the employers’ total pension and OPEB liabilities compared to the fiduciary net position of the
defined benefit pension and OPEB plans. The information available in each of these sections is briefly
summarized below:
F
UND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
As of June 30, 2023, financial statements are presented for the two types of funds administered by PERS:
fiduciary funds, where PERS acts in a fiduciary capacity as a trustee for others and is responsible for
administering the assets placed under its control; and a proprietary fund, where fees are charged for services
provided and the focus is on determining financial position, operating and non-operating income, changes in
net position, and cash flows.
Fiduciary funds include the Defined Benefit Pension Plan, Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan (OPSRP)
Individual Account Program (IAP), the Retirement Health Insurance Account (RHIA), the Retiree Health
Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA), and the Deferred Compensation Plan, known as the Oregon Savings
Growth Plan. Fiduciary funds are used to account for resources held for the benefit of PERS participants. A
statement of fiduciary net position and a statement of changes in fiduciary net position are presented for the
fiduciary funds as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, along with comparative total information as of
and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. These financial statements reflect the resources available to pay
benefits to retired members and other beneficiaries as of year-end, as well as the changes in those resources
during the year.
P
roprietary fund includes the Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account (SRHIA), an enterprise fund. A
statement of net position; a statement of revenues, expenses, and changes in net position; and a statement of
cash flows are presented for the proprietary fund as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, along with
28 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
comparative total information as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. These financial statements
reflect the net position, changes in net position, and cash flows resulting from PERS’ business-type activities.
NOTES TO THE BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
• Note 1 – a summary of significant accounting policies, including the basis of accounting for each of the
fund types, investment accounting policies, management’s use of estimates, and other significant
accounting policies.
• Note 2 – a general description of PERS as well as a description of each of the funds administered by
PERS. Information regarding employer and member participation in the pension and OPEB plans
administered by PERS is also provided.
• Note 3 – the System’s accounts receivables and payables.
• Note 4 – cash and cash equivalents. The note also describes investments, including the techniques
and inputs used to determine fair value, investing authority, investment risk categorizations, and
additional information about unfunded investment commitments, securities lending, and derivatives.
• Note 5 – capital assets used in plan operations.
• Note 6 – reserves.
• Note 7 – potential contingencies of PERS.
• No te  8 – the estimated claims liability of the SRHIA.
• Note 9 – the Employers’ Net Pension Liability.
• Note 10 – Employers’ Net OPEB Liability/(Asset).
• Note 11 – Effect of Future Pronouncements.
REQUIRED SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
In addition to the financial statements and Notes to the Basic Financial Statements, this ACFR includes 10
additional Required Supplementary Information schedules with historical trend information, as described
below:
• The Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability/(Asset) and Related Ratios, page 96, presents a 10-
year trend schedule of the pension plan’s change in total pension liability, change in fiduciary net
position, net pension liability/(asset), fiduciary net position as a percentage of the total pension liability,
total covered payroll, and net pension liability/(asset) as a percentage of covered payroll.
• The Schedule of Investment Returns – Defined Benefit Pension Plan, page 96, presents a 10-year
trend schedule of the annual money-weighted return (internal rate of return) on pension plan
investments, net of pension plan investment expenses.
• The Schedule of Defined Benefit Pension Plan Employer Contributions, on page 98, contains a 10-year
schedule comparing the amount of actuarially determined contributions with the amount of contributions
recognized in relation to the actuarially determined contributions. It also indicates whether there is a
contribution deficiency or excess. In addition, the schedule shows the amounts of contributions
recognized by the pension plan in relation to the actuarially determined contributions as a percentage of
covered payroll.
• The
Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB Liability/(Asset) and Related Ratios for RHIA is on page 100
and for RHIPA is on page 101. The schedules present the OPEB plan’s change in the total OPEB
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 29
liability, change in the fiduciary net position, net OPEB liability/(asset), fiduciary net position as a
percentage of the total OPEB liability, total covered payroll, and net OPEB liability/(asset) as a
percentage of covered payroll. These required 10-year trend schedules begin with the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2017, which was the first year these schedules were required.
• The Schedule of Investment Returns – OPEB Plans for RHIA on page 100 and RHIPA on page 101,
present for each fiscal year the annual money-weighted return (internal rate of return) for each of the
OPEB plan investments, net of OPEB plan investment expenses. These required 10-year trend
schedules begin with fiscal year ended June 30, 2017, which was the first year these schedules were
required.
• The Schedule of OPEB Plan Employer Contributions for both RHIA and RHIPA, on pages 102–105,
contain a 10-year schedule comparing the amount of actuarially determined contributions with the
amount of contributions recognized in relation to the actuarially determined contributions. They also
show whether there is a contribution deficiency or excess. In addition, the schedules show the amounts
of contributions recognized by the OPEB plans in relation to the actuarially determined contributions as
a percentage of covered payroll.
• The  Schedule of Claims Development Information for SRHIA, page 106, shows earned revenues and
expenses over the past ten years.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
In addition to the Required Supplementary Information, there are five Supplementary Information schedules, as
described below:
• The Schedule of Plan Net Position and Schedule of Changes in Plan Net Position – Defined Benefit
Pension Plan, pages 108 and 110, display the components of the defined benefit pension plan.
• The Schedule of Administrative Expenses and Schedule of Payments to Consultants and Contractors
on pages 112 and 113 show the costs of managing the System.
• The Summary of Investment Fees, Commissions, and Expenses begins on page 114 and provides the
detail of investment related expenses included in the Investment Expense line item reported in the
Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position.
Fiduciary Funds
• PERS’ assets exceeded its liabilities at the close of fiscal year 2023, with $100,091.3 million restricted
for pension, IAP, OPEB, and deferred compensation benefits.
• Fiduciary net position increased by $556.4 million, or 0.6%, primarily because employer contributions
and earnings slightly exceeded total benefits and administrative expenses paid.
• PER S’ funding objective is to meet long-term benefit obligations. As of December 31, 2022, the date of
the latest actuarial funding valuation, the funded ratio of the defined benefit pension plan, excluding
side accounts, was 73%. In general, this means that for every dollar of future pension benefits due,
PERS has approximately $0.73 available for payment.
• Revenues of $7,180.6 million (additions to fiduciary net position), which include member and
employer contributions of $3,440.1 million and investment activities totaling $3,722.4 million, were up
36.6% for fiscal year 2023, compared to $5,257.4 million in fiscal year 2022. This is primarily because
of an increase in investment earnings.
• Expenses (deductions from fiduciary net position) increased 1.9% to $6,624.2 million during the fiscal
30 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
year from $6,497.8 million in fiscal year 2022. This was caused by a similar increase in benefit
payments.
Fiduciary Net Position
The condensed comparative summaries of Fiduciary Net Position on page 31 demonstrate that the pension
trust funds are primarily focused on investments and net position (reserves).
• The net position of the Defined Benefit Pension Plan decreased approximately $281.9 million, or 0.3%,
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. This was primarily caused by a combination of the increase
in the fair value of investments and employer contributions being slightly less than the total of benefits
paid and administrative expenses.
• The net position of the OPSRP IAP increased approximately $529.2 million, or 4.3%, during the fiscal
year ended June 30, 2023, primarily because of the increase in the fair value of investments.
• The net position of the Deferred Compensation Plan increased approximately $305.2 million, or 12.2%,
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. This was caused by a $311.9 million, or 12.6%, increase in
the fair value of investments.
• The net position of the RHIA decreased approximately $4.2 million, or 0.6%, during the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2023, primarily because of a 13.0% decrease in employer contributions, offset by a
significant increase in investment income of $17.6 million. The RHIA fund loses money every year
because the plan is overfunded, but losses this year were offset by the increase in investment earnings.
• The  net position of the RHIPA increased approximately $8.1 million, or 9.7%, during the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2023, primarily because of an increase in investment income of $2.8 million and an
insignificant decrease in healthcare premium subsidies.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 31
Changes In Fiduciary Net Position
REVENUES – ADDITIONS TO FIDUCIARY NET POSITION
Additions to Fiduciary Net Position needed to finance retirement benefits are accumulated through the
collection of employer and member contributions and through investment income.
• For fiscal year 2023, the financial market recovered from the volatility experienced in the prior fiscal
year. See the Investment Activities section on page 117 for further discussion.
• Defined Benefit Pension Plan: Total additions for fiscal year 2023 increased by $484.5 million, or 9.7%,
compared to fiscal year 2022, due primarily to better investment performance.
o Employer Contributions decreased $1,637.2 million in fiscal year 2023 compared to fiscal year
2022 primarily because of a decrease in new lump-sum deposits to side accounts.
o Member Contributions, consisting primarily of redirected IAP contributions deposited to
Employee Pension Stability Accounts (EPSA), increased $7.4 million, or 4.6%.
• The Individual Account Program: Total additions increased $793.7 million, or 192.9%, because of the
$731.2 million increase in Net Investment and Other Income.
• Deferred Compensation Plan: The Oregon Savings Growth Plan had a $625.0 million increase in total
TABLE 1
FIDUCIARY NET POSITION, PENSION AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
(in thousands) As of June 30
2023 2022 2023 2022 2023 2022
Cash and Receivables $ 5,898,794         $ 7, 436,005         $ 1,109,557         $ 1,171,302         $ 20,387              $ 24,212
Investments at Fair Value 82,762,870       80,873, 065       12,448,328       11,770,343       2,798,711         2,486,727
Securities Lending
Collateral 540,519            408,623            62,054              46,016              –                   2
Other 23,745              30,994              657                   1,091                –                   –
Total Assets 89,225,928       88,748,687       13,620,596       12,988,752       2,819,098         2,510,941
Investment Purchases 5,122,830         4,528, 482         531,065            450,715            7,769                5,071
Securities Lending
Payable 540,502            408,711            62,052              46,026              –                   2
Other Payables, Leases
Payable and Def. Inflows 74,978              41,941              52,603              46,326              423                   179
Total Liabilities
and Deferred Inflows 5,738,310         4,979, 134         645,720            543,067            8,192                5,252
Total Net Position $ 83,487,618       $ 83,769,553       $ 12,974,876       $ 12,445,685       $ 2,810,906         $ 2,505,689
TABLE 2
FIDUCIARY NET POSITION, OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
(in thousands) As of June 30
2023 2022 2023 2022
Cash and Receivables $ 45,453              $ 57,832              $ 7,049                $ 7,478
Investments at Fair Value 727,139            713,945            89,713              80,059
Securities Lending
Collateral 4,763                3,610                588                   406
Other 40                     75                     5                       9
Total Assets 777,395            775, 462            97,355              87,952
Investment Purchases 43,261              38,421              5,040                4,023
Securities Lending
Payable 4,763                3,611                588                   406
Other Payables 2,820                2,730                329                   195
Total Liabilities 50,844              44, 762              5,957                4,624
Total Net Position $ 726,551            $ 730, 700            $ 91,398              $ 83,328
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Individual Account Program Deferred Compensation Plan
Retirement Health Insurance
Account
Retiree Health Insurance
Premium Account
32 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
additions. Like the other plans, this increase was primarily caused by an increase of $634.6 million in
Net Investment and Other Income, compared to fiscal year 2022. Member Contributions decreased
$9.6 million, or 4.9%, from fiscal year 2022.
• Retirement Health Insurance Account: Total additions increased $17.3 million, or 172.8%, primarily
because of an increase of $17.6 million in Net Investment and Other Income.
• Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account: Total additions increased $2.8 million, or 30.9%, over the
fiscal year 2022. This increase was primarily because of the $2.3 million, or 296.9%, increase in Net
Investment and Other Income.
EXPENSES – DEDUCTIONS FROM FIDUCIARY NET POSITION
Benefit payments, refunds of contributions to members who terminate employment, health insurance
premium subsidies, deferred compensation payments, and administrative costs comprise the System’s
expenses.
• Defined Benefit Pension Plan: Pension benefit and other expenses were $5,746.5 million in fiscal year
2023, a $204.7 million, or 3.7%, increase over fiscal year 2022, primarily because of the 3.7% increase
in pension benefits paid caused by a 3.0% cost-of-living adjustment and a 46.7% increase in lump-sum
installment payments and lump-sum death payouts.
• Individual Account Program: IAP benefit and other expenses decreased by $80.9 million, or 10.7%,
from fiscal year 2022. The decrease in IAP benefit payments is primarily caused by the 10.7%
decrease in service retirements.
• D eferred  Compensation Plan: Deferred compensation benefits and other expenses increased by $3.7
million, or 2.3%, from fiscal year 2022 because of an increase in requests for rollovers and distributions.
• Retirement Health Insurance Account: RHIA healthcare premium and other expenses decreased by
$768,000, or 2.4%, from fiscal year 2022. This decrease was attributed to a $815,000 or 2.7%,
decrease in healthcare premium subsidies, which was primarily caused by the 5.0% decrease in
participants to 40,703.
• Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account: RHIPA healthcare premium and other expenses
decreased by $349,000, or 8.5%, from fiscal year 2022 primarily because of a 12.4% decrease in
healthcare premium subsidies.
• Tables 3 and 4 on the next page show condensed comparative summaries of the changes in fiduciary
net position and reflect the activities of the plans administered by the System.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 33
Proprietary Fund
Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account (SRHIA) uses an enterprise fund to account for the activities of
PERS Health Insurance Program (PHIP), a public entity risk pool.
NET POSITION
• The net position of the SRHIA as of June 30, 2023, was $91.5 million, which was a $2.0 million, or
2.1%, decrease from fiscal year 2022. This was primarily due to claims and administrative expenses
exceeding insurance premium revenue by $4.9 million. There was a $2.3 million increase in interest,
dividends, and other investment income over 2022, which explains why the net decrease in 2002 of
$6.3 million improved to a net decrease of $2.0 million in 2023.
TABLE 3
CHANGES IN FIDUCIARY NET POSITION, PENSION AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
(in thousands) For the Fiscal Years Ended June 30
2023 2022 2023 2022 2023 2022
Additions:
Employer Contributions $ 2,392,963            $ 4,030,159            $ –                      $ –                      $ –                      $ –
Member Contributions 167,473               160,098               692,612               630,155               186,010               195,637
Net Investment and
Other Income 2,904,088            789,785               512,596               (218,607)              285,740               (348,864)
Total Additions 5,464,524            4,980,042            1,205,208            411,548               471,750               (153,227)
Deductions:
Pension Benefits 5,668,631            5,468,215            661,980               744,713               164,424               161,003
Other 77,828                 73,590                 14,038                 12,158                 2,109                   1,835
Total Deductions 5,746,459            5,541,805            676,018               756,871               166,533               162,838
Net Increase (Decrease) (281,935)              (561,763)              529,190               (345,323)              305,217               (316,065)
Net Position
Beginning of Year 83,769,553          84,331,316          12,445,686          12,791,009          2,505,689            2,821,754
End of Year $ 83,487,618          $ 83,769,553          $ 12,974,876          $ 12,445,686          $ 2,810,906            $ 2,505,689
TABLE 4
CHANGES IN FIDUCIARY NET POSITION, OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
(in thousands) For the Fiscal Years Ended June 30
2023 2022 2023 2022
Additions:
Employer Contributions $ 2,139                   $ 2,459                   $ 8,783                   $ 8,265
Net Investment and
Other Income 25,157                 7,547                   3,036                   765
Total Additions 27,296                 10,006                 11,819                 9,030
Deductions:
Healthcare Premium
Subsidies 29,794                 30,609                 3,007                   3,432
Other 1,651                   1,604                   742                      666
Total Deductions 31,445                 32,213                 3,749                   4,098
Net Increase (Decrease) (4,149)                  (22,207)                8,070                   4,932
Net Position
Beginning of Year 730,700               752,907               83,328                 78,396
End of Year $ 726,551               $ 730,700               $ 91,398                 $ 83,328
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Individual Account Program Deferred Compensation Plan
Retirement Health Insurance
Account
Retiree Health Insurance Premium
Account
34 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
CHANGES IN NET POSITION
• SRHIA insurance premiums revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, was $28.4 million, which
was 0.4% higher than fiscal year 2022 because of the decrease in retirees participating in the program
from 51,708 as of June 30, 2022 to 50,103 as of June 30, 2023, offset by a similar increase in Medicare
and non-Medicare premium rates.
• SRHIA healthcare and other expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, decreased $1.9 million,
or 5.4%, from fiscal year 2022 primarily because of a reduction in claims.
Tables 5 and 6 show the condensed summary of net position and the condensed summary of changes in
revenues, expenses, and net position for SRHIA.
TABLE 5
NET POSITION, PROPRIETARY FUND
(in thousands) As of June 30
2023 2022
Cash and Receivables $ 94,346         $ 95,984
Net OPEB Asset 18                12
Securities Lending Collateral 38                541
Total Assets 94,402         96,537
Deferred Outflows of Resources:
Pensions 270              200
OPEB 3                  2
Total Deferred Outflows of Resources 273              202
Claims Payable 876              848
Other Current Liabilities 1,519           1,309
Net Pension Liability 545              286
Other Noncurrent Liabilities 34                43
Total Liabilities 2,974           3,027
Deferred Inflows of Resources:
Pensions 163              223
OPEB 11                11
Total Deferred Inflows of Resources 174              234
Total Net Position $ 91,527         $ 93,478
Standard Retiree Health
Insurance Account
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 35
Net Pension Liability
The Employers’ Net Pension Liability (NPL) as of June 30, 2023, was $18,730.7 million, compared to a Net
Pension Liability of $15,312.0 million as of June 30, 2022. The $3,118.7 million, or 20.4%, increase in
Employers’ Net Pension Liability was primarily due to a $282.0 million decrease in Fiduciary Net Position and a
$3,136.7 million increase in Total Pension Liability.
Net OPEB Liability/(Asset)
The Employers’ Net OPEB Asset for RHIA as of June 30, 2023, was $366.2 million, compared to the Net
OPEB Asset of $355.3 million as of June 30, 2022. The increase in Employers’ Net OPEB Asset was primarily
due to a $15.0 million decrease in Total OPEB Liability. The Employer’s Net OPEB Asset for RHIPA as of June
30, 2023, was $44.1 million, compared to the Net OPEB Asset of $34.2 million as of June 30, 2022. The
increase in Employers’ Net OPEB Asset was primarily due to an $8.1 million increase in the Fiduciary Net
Position.
Investment Activities
During fiscal year 2023, investments increased 3.0% over the prior fiscal year as markets moved toward
increased stability. Holdings in all asset classes experienced positive investment returns. The Private Equity
portfolio increased by $1,600.0 million, or 6.5%; Public Equity portfolio decreased $689.0 million, or 2.9%; the
Real Assets portfolio increased $1,486.7 million, or 19.8%; the Real Estate portfolio decreased $3.3 million, or
0.1%; the Debt Securities portfolio increased $581.2 million, or 3.0%; and the Opportunity portfolio increased
$200.8 million, or 8.9%. One-year returns on asset classes and comparative benchmarks are presented in
Table 9 of this section.
TABLE 6
REVENUES, EXPENSES, AND CHANGES IN NET POSITION, PROPRIETARY FUND
(in t
housands) For the Fiscal Years Ended June 30
2023 2022
Revenues:
Insurance Premiums $ 28,412         $ 28,296
Investment Income 2,975           612
Total Revenues 31,387         28, 908
Expenses:
Claims 28,118         31,035
Change in Estimated Liabilities 28                18
Administrative Expense 5,192           4,187
Total Expenses 33,338         35,240
Net Decrease (1,951)         (6, 332)
Net Position
Beginning of Year 93,478         99,810
End of Year $ 91,527         $ 93,478
Standard Retiree Health
Insurance Account
36 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
PLAN MEMBERSHIP
Table 7 reflects the Defined Benefit Pension Plan membership as of the end of the fiscal years.
RETIREMENTS FROM SERVICE
Retirements from service decreased 10.7% in fiscal year 2023. Service retirements in fiscal year 2023 were
6,975 compared to 7,811 in fiscal year 2022.
TABLE 7
CHANGES IN PLAN MEMBERSHIP
As of June 30
2023 2022
Active members:
General 172,702 165,299 4.5 %
Police and Fire 16,034 15,641 2.5
Subtotal - Active members 188,736 180,940 4.3
Retirees and Inactive members:
Receiving Benefits:
General 149,347 146,712 1.8
Police and Fire 14,190 13,614 4.2
Not Receiving Benefits:
General 50,511 49,320 2.4
Police and Fire          2,589          2,494 3.8
Subtotal - Inactive members 216,637 212,140 2.1
Total members 405,373 393,080 3.1 %
Percentage
Change
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 37
CURRENTLY KNOWN FACTS, CONDITIONS, OR DECISIONS
There are no currently known facts, conditions, or decisions that are expected to have a significant effect on
the System’s financial position or results of operations.
CONTACTING THE SYSTEM’S FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
This financial report is designed to provide plan participants, employers, citizens, taxpayers, and others with a
general overview of the System’s finances and to demonstrate the Board’s oversight of the System. If you have
questions about this report or need additional financial information, please contact the Financial Services
Division administrator:
Mail
P.O. Box 23700
Tigard, Oregon 97281-3700
Email
pers.gasb.questions@pers.oregon.gov
TABLE 8
RETIREMENTS FROM SERVICE BY FISCAL YEAR
9,000
8,000
7,000
(/)
6,000 +-'
C a, 5,000 E a, 4,000 ... .:; a, 3,000 0:::
2,000
1,000
Fiscal Year
38 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
2023 2022
Total
Portfolio, Excluding Variable Account 3.17 % 6.32 %
Policy Benchmark1 3.73 (0.66)
Variable Account 16.42    (16.21)
B
enchmark: MSCI All Country World Investable Market Index Net 16.14 (16.52)
Domestic Stocks 16.16     (12.92)
Benchmark: Russell 3000 Index 18.95    (13.87)
International Stocks 14.99     (16.47)
Benchmark: MSCI All Country World ex-US Investable Market Index Net 12.47     (19.86)
Fixed Income Segment 0.70 (9.05)
Benchmark: Oregon Custom Index2 (0.94) (10.12)
Risk Parity3 n/a (12.95)
Benchmark: S&P Risk Parity - 12% Target Volatility n/a (6.67)
R
eal Estate (1.38) 29.61
Benchmark: Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark 4
(3.91) 27.26
Private Equity (1.84)      24.23
Benchmark: Russell 3000 Index + 300 bps (Adj.) 5 (5.81)      15.25
Real Assets 9.54 23.15
Benc
hmark: Consumer Price Index + 400 bps 7.08 13.39
Diversifying Strategies 5.83 17.09
Benchmark: HFRI FOF Conservative Index 3.47 0.13
Opportunity Portfolio 6.10 10.19
Benchmark: OPERF Policy Benchmark6 3.73 14.47
3 Allocation to Risk Parity was eliminated 12/7/2022.
Table 9
Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2023 and 2022
The rates of return reported in the Investment Section are based on a time-weighted rate of return methodology based upon fair
values, unless disclosed otherwise in the footnotes to the associated table.
* Investment Results are based upon OIC asset classes as determined by each manager's primary investment type, not the
financial statement classification of individual holdings.
2 From March 1, 2016 to September 30, 2021, index was 46% BBG Aggregate Bond, 37% BBG Treasury, 13% S&P LSTA and 4%
BofA ML High Yield Master II. From October 1, 2021 to Present, index is 100% Bloomberg U.S. Aggregate.
4 Starting July 1, 2017, methodology for monthly return is calculated by geometrically linking prior months returns, and then deriving
the monthly returns by calculating the geometric average. Returns are not actual monthly, but rather equivalent for all intra-quarter
months, in order to match the actual quarterly return.
5 From July 1, 2017, the monthly return is calculated as the geometrically linked monthly-portion of the quarterly return. Returns are
not actual monthly, but rather equivalent for all intra-quarter months, in order to match the actual quarterly return.
6 From September 1, 2006 to March 31, 2023, the policy benchmark was 100% CPI+5%. From April 1, 2023 to Present, benchmark
is 100% OPERF policy benchmark. The 1-Year return of 3.73% represents the OPERF policy benchmark.
1 From July 1, 2020 to September 30, 2021 the policy benchmark was 19% Russell 3000+300Bps quarter lag, 20% Oregon Custom
FI Benchmark, 12.5% Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark, 33.5% MSCI ACWI IMI Net, 12.50% CPI+4%, and 2.50% S&P Risk
Parity - 12% Target Volatility. From October 1, 2021 to March 31, 2023 the policy benchmark was 20% Russell 3000+300 Bps
quarter lag, 20% BBG U.S. Aggregate, 12.50% NCRIEF ODCE (Custom), 30% MSCI ACWI IMI Net, 7.50% CPI+4%, 7.50% HFRI
FOF Conservative Index and 2.50 % S&P Risk Parity - 12% Target Volatility. From April 1, 2023 to Present, the policy benchmark is
20% Russell 3000+300Bps quarter lag, 25% BBG U.S. Aggregate, 12.50% NCRIEF ODCE (Custom), 27.5% MSCI ACWI IMI Net,
7.50% CPI+4% and 7.50% HFRI FOF Conservative Index.
Investment Results*
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 39
Basic Financial Statements
40 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Statement of Fiduciary Net Position
Pension and Other Postemployment Plans
As of June 30, 2023, with Comparative Totals as of June 30, 2022
Defined Benefit OPEB Plans
Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
Oregon Public
Service Retirement
Plan Individual
Account Program
Retirement Health
Insurance
Account
Retiree Health
Insurance
Premium Account
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 2,114,119,006        $ 675,076,928          $ 13,731,977          $ 2,359,520
Receivables:
Employer 116,675,021          –                       1,915,239            987,661
Plan Member –                       45,208,868            –                     –
Interest and Dividends 251,724,982          28,851,332            2,218,180            273,674
Member Loans –                       –                       –                     –
Investment Sales and Other Receivables 3,141,238,053        360,357,563          27,587,312          3,426,752
Leases –                       –                       –                     –
Transition Liability 243,198,241          –                       –                     –
Total Receivables 3,752,836,297        434,417,763          31,720,731          4,688,087
Due from Other Funds 31,839,506            61,695                   173                     865
Investments:
Debt Securities 16,020,046,819      3,128,703,953        141,167,361        17,416,927
Public Equity 16,927,357,995      3,610,049,974        147,001,647        18,136,748
Real Estate and Real Estate Investment Trusts 11,988,807,591      1,374,091,138        105,644,406        13,034,180
Private Equity 23,288,326,230      2,669,179,770        205,214,854        25,318,969
Real Assets 7,986,001,641        915,311,552          70,372,003          8,682,347
Diversifying Strategies 4,374,229,444        501,350,102          38,545,357          4,755,644
Opportunity Portfolio 2,178,100,065        249,641,841          19,193,242          2,368,021
Total Investments 82,762,869,785      12,448,328,330      727,138,870        89,712,836
Securities Lending Collateral 540,518,908          62,053,616            4,762,651            587,741
Prepaid Expenses 5,750,276              523,909                 40,280                 4,970
Capital Assets at Cost, Net 17,994,564            133,394                 –                     –
Total Assets 89,225,928,342      13,620,595,635      777,394,682        97,354,019
Liabilities:
Investment Purchases and Accrued Expenses 5,122,830,498        531,064,892          43,261,433          5,039,721
Deposits and Other Liabilities 68,943,575            27,240,190            2,718,283            135,843
Due to Other Funds 5,997,666              25,362,785            101,570               193,184
Leases Payable 36,380                   -                        -                      -
Securities Lending Collateral Due Borrowers 540,502,157          62,051,696            4,762,503            587,723
Total Liabilities 5,738,310,276        645,719,563          50,843,789          5,956,471
Deferred Inflows of Resources:
Leases, net of Amortization –                       –                       –                     –
Net Position:
Restricted for:
Pension 83,487,618,066      –                       –                     –
Individual Account Program –                       12,974,876,072      –                     –
Other Postemployment Benefits –                       –                       726,
550,893        91,397,548
Deferred Compensation Plan –                       –                       –                     –
$ 83,487,618,066      $ 12,974,876,072      $ 726,550,893        $ 91,397,548
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Total Net Position
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 41
Continued from previous page.
$
$
Deferred
Compensation Plan
6,298,479 $
960,518
13,128,058
14 088 576
475,124,209
2,323,587,289
2 798 711 498
2,819,098,809
7,769, 157
313,660
109,273
8,192,346
2023
2,811,585,910
119,577,921
45,208,868
284,028,686
13,128,058
3,532,609,680
243 198 241
4 237 751 454
31 ,902,239
19,782,459,269
23,026,133,653
13,481,577,315
26,188,039,823
8,980,367,543
4,918,880,547
2 449 303 169
98,826,761,319
607,923, 172
6,319,435
18 127 958
106,540,371,487
5,709,965,701
99,351,551
31,764,478
36,380
607 904 335
6,449,022,445
83,487,618,066
12,974,876,072
817,948,441
2 810 906 463 2,810,906,463
$
2,810,906,463 $ 100,091,349,042 $
2022
4,871,863,273
47,486,446
27,901,002
155,423,369
13,354,659
3,251,639,426
242,030
305 741 323
3,801,788,255
23,177,382
19,201,300,293
23,715,061 ,151
13,484,899,469
24,588,062,306
7,493,706,329
5, 192,61 6,827
2,248,492,239
95,924,138,614
458,656,998
11 ,138,499
21 029 805
105,111,792,826
5,026,711,580
67,583,566
23,058,303
488,211
458 755 508
5,576,597, 168
241,340
83,769,552,854
12,445,685,673
814,027,493
2,505,688,298
99,534,954,318
42 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position
Pension and Other Postemployment Plans
For
the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023, with Comparative Totals for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
Oregon Public
Service
Reti
rement Plan
Individual Account
Program
Retirement Health
Insurance Account
Retiree Health
Insurance Premium
Acc
ount
Additions:
Contributions:
Employer $ 2,392,962,472        $ –                      $ 2,138,751                $ 8,782,913
Plan Member 167,473,325          692,611,666         –                          –
Total Contributions 2,560,435,797        692,611,666         2,138,751                8,782,913
Investment Income:
Net Appreciation/(Depreciation) in Fair Value
of Investments 1,948,452,207        394,143,701         16,772,502               2,042,156
Interest, Dividends and Other Investment Income 2,007,085,207        237,627,900         17,662,527               2,096,671
Total Investment Income 3,955,537,414        631,771,601         34,435,029               4,138,827
Less Investment Expense (1,056,273,563)      (123,405,052)        (9,300,584)               (1,105,178)
Net Investment Income 2,899,263,851        508,366,549         25,134,445               3,033,649
Securities Lending Income:
Securities Lending Income 19,594,981            2,193,950             172,569                   20,404
Less Securities Lending Expense (16,948,216)           (1,898,621)            (149,252)                  (17,652)
Net Securities Lending Income 2,646,765              295,329                23,317                     2,752
Other Income 2,177,099              3,934,525             –                          –
Total Additions 5,464,523,512        1,205,208,069       27,296,513               11,819,314
Deductions:
Benefits 5,664,539,881        661,979,840         –                          –
Death Benefits 4,090,901              –                      –                          –
Refunds of Contributions 10,172,498            –                      –                          –
Administrative Expense 67,655,020            14,037,830           1,651,347                741,986
Healthcare Premium Subsidies –                       –                      29,793,960               3,007,586
Total Deductions 5,746,458,300        676,017,670         31,445,307               3,749,572
Net Increase/(Decrease) (281,934,788)         529,190,399         (4,148,794)               8,069,742
83,769,552,854      $ 12,445,685,673     $ 730,699,687             $ 83,327,806
End of Year $ 83,487,618,066      $ 12,974,876,072     $ 726,550,893             $ 91,397,548
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Defined Benefit OPEB Plans
Net Position
Beginning of Year
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 43
Continued from the previous page.
Deferred
Compensation Plan 2023 2022
$ $ 2,403,884,136 s 4,040,882,000
186,009,988 1,046,094 ,979 985,890,634
186,009,988 3,449 ,979,115 5,026,772,634
269,696,985 2,631, 107,551 (547,515,321)
20,140,586 2,284,612,891 2,199,783,729
289,837,571 4,915,720,442 1,652,268,408
(6,220,874 ) ( 1,196,305,251 ) (1,442,410,880)
283,616,697 3,719,415,191 209,857,528
19 21,981,923 6,774,237
(19) (19,013,760) (2,392, 237)
2,968 ,163 4,382,000
2,123,333 8,234,957 16,384,9 10
471,750 ,018 7,180,597,426 5,257,397,072
164,423,617 6,490 ,943,338 6,368,198, 702
4,090,901 5,732,332
10, 172,498 14,893,205
2,108,236 86, 194,419 74,959, 193
32,801,546 34,041,296
166,531 ,853 6 ,624,202,702 6,497,824,728
305,218,165 556,394,724 (1,240,427,656)
$ 2,505 ,688,298 $ 99,534,954,318 $ 100,775,381,974
$ 2,810,906,463 $ 100,091,349,042 $ 99,534,954,318
44 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Statement of Net Position
Proprietary Fund
As of June 30, 2023, with Comparative Totals as of June 30, 2022
Enterprise Fund
Standard Retiree Health Insurance
Account
2023 2022
Assets:
Current Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 94,345,557        $ 95,984,305
Securities Lending Collateral 38,031               540,718
Total Current Assets 94,383,588        96,525,023
Noncurrent Assets
Net OPEB Asset 18,059               12,201
Total Noncurrent Assets 18,059               12,201
Total Assets 94,401,647        96,537,224
Deferred Outflows of Resources
Pension 270,477             199,506
OPEB 2,645                 2,087
Total Deferred Outflows of Resources 273,122             201,593
Liabilities:
Current Liabilities
Accrued Expenses 1,311,061          1,153,819
Compensated Absences 29,776               34,089
Due to Other Funds 137,761             119,079
Estimated Insurance Claims Due 876,000             848,000
Pension Obligation Bonds 2,267                 2,283
Securities Lending Collateral Due Borrowers 38,031               540,718
Total Current Liabilities 2,394,896          2,697,988
Noncurrent Liabilities
Compensated Absences 16,749               19,175
Pension Obligation Bonds 9,262                 12,426
Other Liabilities 8,166                 11,320
Net Pension Liability 544,992             286,029
Total Noncurrent Liabilities 579,169             328,950
Total Liabilities 2,974,065          3,026,938
Deferred Inflows of Resources
Pension 163,281             223,312
OPEB 10,658               11,047
Total Deferred Inflows of Resources 173,939             234,359
Net Position:
Restricted for:
OPEB 10,046               3,241
Unrestricted 91,516,719        93,474,279
Total Net Position $ 91,526,765        $ 93,477,520
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 45
Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net Position
Proprietary Fund
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023, with Comparative Totals for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
2023 2022
Operating Revenues:
Insurance Premium Revenue $ 28,412,179      $ 28,295,570
Total Operating Revenues 28,412,179      28,295,570
Operating Expenses:
Claims Expense 28,118,167      31,035,409
Increase in Estimated Liabilities 28,000             18,000
Administrative Expense 5,191,371        4,187,165
Total Operating Expenses 33,337,538      35,240,574
Operating Loss (4,925,359)       (6,945,004)
Non-Operating Revenues:
Interest, Dividends, and Other Investment Income 2,974,604        612,086
Securities Lending Income 8,045               1,179
Less Securities Lending Expense (8,045)              (1,179)
Net Securities Lending Income –                  –
Total Non-Operating Revenues 2,974,604        612,086
Change in Net Position (1,950,755)       (6,332,918)
93,477,520      99,810,438
End of Year $ 91,526,765      $ 93,477,520
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Enterprise Fund
Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account
Total Net Position
Beginning of Year
46 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Statement of Cash Flows
Proprietary Fund
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023, with Comparative Totals for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
2023 2022
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
Insurance Premiums $ 28,412,179        $ 28,295,570
Claims Paid (28,118,167)       (31,035,409)
Other Payments (4,907,364)         (3,911,927)
Net Cash Used for Operating Activities (4,613,352)         (6,651,766)
Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
Interest and Dividends Received 2,974,604          612,086
Net Decrease in Cash and Cash Equivalents (1,638,748)         (6,039,680)
Cash and Cash Equivalents Beginning of Year 95,984,305        102,023,985
Cash and Cash Equivalents End of Year $ 94,345,557        $ 95,984,305
Reconciliation of Operating Loss to Net
Cash Used for Operating Activities
Operating Loss $ (4,925,359)         $ (6,945,004)
Adjustments to reconcile operating loss to net cash
used for operating activities:
Changes in assets, deferred outflows of resources, liabilities,
and deferred inflows of resources:
Net OPEB Asset (5,858)               (10,399)
Deferred Outflows of Resources - Pension (70,971)             (15,475)
Deferred Outflows of Resources - OPEB (558)                  300
Accrued Expenses 157,242             313,242
Compensated Absences (6,739)               13,121
Due to Other Funds 18,682              19,906
Estimated Insurance Claims Due 28,000              18,000
Pension Obligation Bonds (3,180)               (2,604)
O
ther Liabilities (3,154)               838
Net Pension Liability 258,963             (263,156)
Deferred Inflows of Resources - Pension (60,031)             210,835
Deferred Inflows of Resources - OPEB (389)                  8,630
Net Cash Used for Operating Activities $ (4,613,352)         $ (6,651,766)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Enterprise Fund
Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 47
Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
A. REPORTING ENTITY
The accompanying financial statements include all activities and funds administered by the Oregon Public
Employees Retirement System (PERS or the System). The Defined Benefit and other postemployment benefits
(OPEB) plans are fiduciary component units of the State of Oregon for financial reporting purposes. PERS financial
statements are included in fiduciary and proprietary funds in the State of Oregon’s Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report (ACFR).
B. BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The accompanying financial statements are based on the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023. They are prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America as set forth in
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) pronouncements that apply to governmental accounting for
fiduciary funds and enterprise funds. Fiduciary funds are used to account for assets held by a governmental unit in a
trustee capacity (trust funds). Proprietary funds may be used to report any activity for which a fee is charged to
external users for goods or services.
PERS pension, OPEB, and deferred compensation activities are accounted for in four pension and other
postemployment benefit trust funds and one other employee benefit fund:
• D efined Benefit Pension Plan: a cost-sharing, multiple-employer plan, which includes the Variable Annuity
Account.
• Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan – Individual Account Program: an individual account-based program
under the PERS tax-qualified governmental plan.
• Retirement Health Insurance Account: a cost-sharing, multiple-employer plan.
• Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account: a single-employer plan.
• Deferred Compensation Plan (Oregon Savings Growth Plan): an other employee benefit fund.
PERS’ public entity risk pool activity is accounted for in a single proprietary enterprise fund:
• Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account.
C. BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
The accrual basis of accounting is used for all funds. Revenues are recognized when earned. Contributions are
recognized when due, pursuant to legal (or statutory) requirements. Benefits and withdrawals are recognized when
they are currently due and payable in accordance with the terms of the plans.
Proprietary funds distinguish operating revenues and expenses from nonoperating items. Operating revenues and
expenses generally result from providing services and producing and delivering goods in connection with a
proprietary fund’s principal ongoing operations. The principal operating revenues are insurance premiums, and
operating expenses include claims and administrative expenses. All revenues and expenses not meeting this
definition are reported as nonoperating revenues and expenses. Deferred outflows of resources related to pension
and OPEB that result from contributions made subsequent to the measurement date will be recognized as a
reduction of the net pension liability and net OPEB liability or as an increase in the net OPEB asset in the following
year. Other amounts reported as deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of resources related to pension
and OPEB will be recognized in pension and OPEB expenses for approximately each of the next four years.
D. INVESTMENTS
Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) 293.706 established the Oregon Investment Council (OIC), which consists of five
voting members. Four members of the council, who are qualified by training and experience in the field of
investment or finance, are appointed by the Governor subject to state senate confirmation. The State Treasurer
serves as the council’s remaining voting member. In addition, the director of PERS serves as a nonvoting OIC
member.
ORS 293.701 defines the investment funds over which OIC has responsibility. Included are the Oregon Public
Employees Retirement Fund (OPERF), which is composed of the Defined Benefit Pension Plan, the Individual
48 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Account Program, the Other Postemployment Benefit plans, and the Deferred Compensation Fund. OIC establishes
policies for the investment and reinvestment of moneys in the investment funds as well as the acquisition, retention,
management, and disposition of investments in the investment funds. OIC is also responsible for providing an
examination of the effectiveness of the investment program.
OIC ensures moneys in the investment funds are invested and reinvested to achieve the investment objective of
making the moneys as productive as possible. Furthermore, the investments of those funds are managed as a
prudent investor would do under the prevailing circumstances and in light of the purposes, terms, distribution
requirements, and laws governing each investment fund. This standard requires the exercise of reasonable care,
skill, and caution and is applied to investments, not in isolation, but in the context of each fund’s portfolio as part of
an overall investment strategy. The strategy should incorporate risk and return objectives reasonably suitable to the
particular investment fund.
When implementing investment decisions, OIC has a duty to diversify the investments of the investment funds
unless, under the circumstances, it is not prudent to do so. In addition, OIC must act with prudence when selecting
agents and delegating authority.
Investments a re recognized at fair value — that is the amount that could be received to sell an asset or paid to
transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Investments that
do not have a readily determinable fair value are valued using the net asset value (NAV) per share. Such values
generally represent PERS’ ownership interest in partnership capital. Investments are reported on the trade date.
The fair value of publicly traded debt and equity securities in active markets is determined by the custodian’s pricing
agent using nationally recognized pricing services. The custodian’s pricing agent values equity securities traded on
a national or international exchange at the last reported sales price and generally values debt securities by using
evaluated bid prices. For securities that do not have an active market, such as private placements or commingled
investment vehicles, a market price is calculated by either the custodian’s pricing agent or the investment manager.
For example, a similar benchmark security may be used to derive the fair value. The benchmark will typically have a
coupon rate and maturity date comparable to the debt security being valued, and its market risk will be similar,
considering current market conditions. The fair value of real estate investment trust (REIT) securities is determined
by the custodian’s pricing agent using recognized pricing services.
Investments in r eal estate, other than publicly traded REITs, for which observable market prices in active markets do
not exist, are reported at fair value as of June 30, 2023, as determined by management based on valuation
information provided in good faith by the general partner. Direct investments in real estate are appraised every two
to three years. Between appraisals, investment managers adjust values to reflect current and projected operating
performance and financial transactions. In the absence of observable market prices, general partners determine the
fair value of real estate partnerships using valuation methods considered most appropriate. Several factors are
considered, including the nature of the investment, local market conditions, trading values on public exchanges for
comparable investments, current and projected operating performance, and the financing of transactions
subsequent to the acquisition of the investment.
Investments in private equities are recorded at fair value as of June 30, 2023, as determined by management based
on valuation information provided by the general partner. Investments in private equities representing publicly traded
securities are stated at quoted market price. When observable market inputs are not available, valuation models are
applied. The general partner determines fair value based on the best information available and by reference to
information including, but not limited to, the following: projected sales, net earnings, earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization, balance sheets, public and private transactions, valuations for publicly traded
comparable companies, and/or other measures, and consideration of any other pertinent information including the
types of securities held and the general partner’s own assumptions regarding the investment. The methods used to
determine the fair value of these investments typically include: (1) the market approach (whereby fair value is
derived by reference to observable valuation measures for comparable companies or assets) and (2) the income
approach (e.g., the discounted cash flow method).
Investments in th e Opportunity, Real Assets, and Diversifying Strategies portfolios are recorded at fair value as of
June 30, 2023, by the respective general partner or account manager. Investments in the Opportunity, Real Assets,
and Diversifying Strategies portfolios representing publicly traded securities are stated at quoted market price.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 49
Where observable market inputs are not available, valuation models are applied. The general partner or account
manager determines fair value based on the best information available and by reference to information including,
but not limited to, the following: projected sales, net earnings, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization, balance sheets, public and private transactions, valuations for publicly traded comparable companies,
and/or other measures, and consideration of any other pertinent information including the types of securities held
and the general partner’s own assumptions regarding the investment. The methods used to determine the fair value
of these investments typically include: (1) the market approach (whereby fair value is derived by reference to
observable valuation measures for comparable companies or assets) and (2) the income approach (e.g., the
discounted cash flow method).
Due to the inherent uncertainty and the degree of judgment involved in determining the investment valuations of the
Real Estate, Private Equity, Opportunity, Real Assets and diversifying strategies portfolios, the fair values reflected
in the accompanying financial statements may differ significantly from values that would have been used had a
readily determinable fair value for the investments existed, and the difference could be material. In addition, these
investments are generally considered to be illiquid long-term investments, and the recorded fair values may
materially differ from the amounts that eventually may be realized from the sale or other disposition of these
investments.
OIC has approved the following asset classes for the OPERF: Short-Term Investments, Fixed Income, Real Estate,
Public and Private Equities, Real Assets, and Diversifying Strategies. In addition, OPERF invests in the Opportunity
Portfolio, which may be populated with investment approaches across a wide range of investment opportunities with
no limitation as to asset classes or strategies. OIC must approve, in advance, the purchase of investments in a new
asset class not described above.
Table 1 below displays the OIC-approved asset allocation policy.
E. LEASES
For GASB 87 reporting, lease expenses are immaterial to the pension trust funds. Certain lease assets meet the
capitalization threshold set by the state but are still considered immaterial to the pension trust fund. Leases meeting
that threshold of total lease payments of $5,000 for lessors and $250,000 for lessees have been disclosed in Note 5,
Capital Assets, including information regarding Lease Obligations. PERS’ leases are included in the financial
reporting of the State of Oregon.
F. EARNINGS CREDITING
By law, earnings are credited to member accounts on a calendar-year basis. Members in Tier One are currently
guaranteed to receive at least the assumed earnings rate used in the most recent actuarial valuation. Variable
Annuity Account participants, IAP members, Tier Two members, and Employee Pension Stability Accounts are
credited actual earnings or losses, less deductions allowed by law.
TABLE 1
Asset Class Target Allocation
Cash 0.0%
Debt Securities 25.0%
Public Equity 27.5%
Private Equity 20.0%
Real Estate 12.5%
Real Assets 7.5%
Diversifying Strategies 7.5%
Total 100.0%
50 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
G. ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
PERS’ administrative expenses are funded from investment earnings and administrative fees collected from
employers and members. These funds are allocated to all plans and programs administered by the System. If
investment earnings and fees are insufficient for such purpose, the remaining expenses are paid from employer
contributions.
H. USE OF ESTIMATES IN THE PREPARATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The preparation of the System’s financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain financial
statement amounts and disclosures. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
I. COMPARATIVE TOTALS
The basic financial statements include certain prior-year summarized comparative information in total but not at the
level of detail required for a presentation in conformity with the accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America. Accordingly, such information should be read in conjunction with the System’s financial
statements as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, from which the summarized information was derived.
J. EFFECT OF NEW GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD (GASB) PRONOUNCEMENT
GASB STATEMENT NO. 96
GASB Statement No. 96, Subscription-Based Information Technology Arrangements, was issued in May 2020. This
statement provides guidance on accounting and financial reporting for subscription-based information technology
arrangements (SBITAs). The guidance requires the recognition of a right-to-use subscription asset and a
corresponding subscription liability for contracts that convey control of the right-to-use another party’s information
technology software alone or in conjunction with tangible capital assets for a specified time period in an exchange or
exchange- like transaction. The requirements of this statement are similar to those of GASB Statement No. 87,
Leases. The requirements of this statement are effective with fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2022. PERS
completed an evaluation of GASB Statement No. 96 and determined that the recognition and measurement criteria
applied to PERS’ current information technology arrangement population would not have a significant impact.
Therefore, there are no new SBITA disclosures included in PERS' June 30, 2023 financial statements.
K. RECLASSIFICATIONS
We have made reclassifications to certain comparative totals as of June 30, 2022, to conform to the presentation as
of June 30, 2023.
Note 2 - Description of Plan
A. ORGANIZATION
PERS administers a cost-sharing, multiple-employer defined benefit pension plan (Plan) for units of state
government, political subdivisions, community colleges, and school districts. The Plan contains multiple actuarial
pools. Plan assets may be used to pay the benefits of the employees of any employer that provides pensions
through the Plan. Participation by state government units, school districts, and community colleges is mandatory.
Participation by most political subdivisions is optional but irrevocable if elected. As of June 30, 2023, there were 897
participating employers.
PERS is administered in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 238, Chapter 238A, and Internal
Revenue Code Section 401(a). The Oregon Legislature has delegated authority to the Public Employees Retirement
Board (Board) to administer and manage the System. All members of the Board are appointed by the governor and
confirmed by the senate. The Governor designates the chairperson. One member must be a public employer
manager or a local elected official, one member must be a union-represented public employee or retiree, and three
members must have experience in business management, pension management, or investing.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 51
TABLE 2
Plan Membership as of June 30, 2023 Employers Tier  One Tier Two OPSRP Total RHIA RHIPA
Employers
State Agencies 108
Political Subdivisions 479
Community Colleges 17
School Districts 293
Total Employers 897
Inactive Members - General Service
Retirees and Beneficiaries Currently Receiving Benefits 114,895 20,194 11,202 146,291 38,402 428
Alternate Payees Currently Receiving Benefits 2,832 176 48 3,056 n/a n/a
117,727 20,370 11,250 149,347 38,402 428
Inactive Members Eligible for, but not yet Receiving Benefits 5,961 5,486 9,058 20,505 11,103 n/a
Inactive Members Eligible for Refund Value of Account Only 1,360 6,735 n/a1
8,095 n/a n/a
Inactive Members not Eligible for Refund or Retirement 0 0 21,911 21,911 n/a n/a
7,321 12,221 30,969 50,511 11,103 –
Total Inactive Members - General Service 125,048 32,591 42,219 199,858 49,505 428
Inactive Members - Police and Fire
Retirees and Beneficiaries Currently Receiving Benefits 10,568 2,231 697 13,496 2,301 101
Alternate Payees Currently Receiving Benefits 636 46 12 694 n/a n/a
11,204 2,277 709 14,190 2,301 101
Inactive Members Eligible for, but not yet Receiving Benefits 222 340 434 996 607 n/a
Inactive Members Eligible for Refund Value of Account Only 23 274 n/a1
297 n/a n/a
Inactive Members not Eligible for Refund or Retirement 0 0 1,296 1,296 n/a n/a
245 614 1,730 2,589 607 –
Total Inactive Members - Police and Fire 11,449 2,891 2,439 16,779 2,908 101
Active Members - General Service
State Agencies 2,814 5,622 38,755 47,191 8,319 8,396
School Districts 3,610 10,440 62,620 76,670 13,983 n/a
Political Subdivisions 2,190 5,357 34,095 41,642 7,502 n/a
Community Colleges 334 973 5,892 7,199 1,302 n/a
Total Active Members - General Service 8,948 22,392 141,362 172,702 31,106 8,396
Active Members - Police and Fire
State Agencies 263 1,082 4,764 6,109 1,343 1,320
School Districts 4 21 72 97 24 n/a
Political Subdivisions 286 1,743 7,778 9,807 2,029 n/a
Community Colleges 1 5 15 21 6 n/a
Total Active Members - Police and Fire 554 2,851 12,629 16,034 3,402 1,320
Grand Total Members 145,999 60,725 198,649 405,373 86,921 10,245
1 Defined benefit only. No individual accounts are maintained.
Inactive Members - Police and Fire Not Receiving Benefits
Defined Benefit Plan Healthcare
Postemployment
Inactive Members - General Service Receiving Benefits
Inactive Members - General Service Not Receiving Benefits
Inactive Members - Police and Fire Receiving Benefits
52 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
B. PLAN MEMBERSHIP
Table 2 shows data about employers, retirees, active members, and inactive members as of June 30, 2023.
The 1995 Legislature enacted Chapter 654, Section 3, Oregon Laws 1995, which has been codified into
ORS 238.435. This legislation created a second tier of benefits for those who established membership on or after
January 1, 1996. The second tier does not have the Tier One assumed earnings rate guarantee and has a higher
normal retirement age of 60, compared to age 58 for Tier One.
As of June 30, 2023, Tier One was comprised of 9,502 active plan members, 128,931 retired plan members or their
beneficiaries currently receiving benefits, and 7,566 inactive plan members entitled to but not yet receiving benefits
for a total of 145,999 members. For Tier Two, as of June 30, 2023, there were 25,243 active plan members, 22,647
retired plan members or their beneficiaries currently receiving benefits, and 12,835 inactive plan members entitled to
but not yet receiving benefits for a total of 60,725.
The 2003 Legislature enacted House Bill 2021, codified as ORS 238A, which created the Oregon Public Service
Retirement Plan (OPSRP). OPSRP consists of the Pension Program and the Individual Account Program.
Membership for the OPSRP Pension Program includes public employees hired on or after August 29, 2003. OPSRP
is part of PERS and is administered by the Board. The PERS Board is directed to adopt any rules necessary to
administer OPSRP , and such rules are to be considered part of the plan for IRS purposes.
As of J une  30, 2023, there were 153,991 active plan members, 11,959 retired plan members or their beneficiaries
currently receiving benefits, 9,492 inactive plan members entitled to but not yet receiving benefits, and 23,207
inactive plan members not eligible for refund or retirement for a total of 198,649 OPSRP Pension Program
members.
Beginning January 1, 2004, PERS active Tier One and Tier Two members became members of the Individual
Account Program (IAP) of OP SR P. PERS members retained their existing Regular or Variable (if applicable)
accounts, but member contributions as of January 1, 2004, were deposited into the member’s IAP account. IAP
accounts are credited with earnings and losses net of administrative expenses.
C. PLAN BENEFITS
1. PERS PENSION (CHAPTER 238 — TIER ONE/TIER TWO)
a. Pension Benefits
The PERS retirement allowance is payable monthly for life. Members may select from 13 retirement benefit options
that are actuarially equivalent to the base benefit.
These options include survivorship benefits and lump-sum refunds. The basic benefit is most commonly based on
years of service and final average salary. A percentage (2.0% for Police and Fire employees, 1.67% for General
Service employees) is multiplied by the number of years of service and the final average salary. Benefits may also
be calculated under a formula plus annuity (for members who were contributing before August 21, 1981) or a money
match computation if a greater benefit results. Monthly payments must be a minimum of $200 per month or the
member will receive a lump-sum payment of the actuarial equivalent of benefits to which they are entitled.
Under S enate Bill (SB) 1049, passed during the 2019 legislative session, the salary included in the determination of
final average salary is limited for all members beginning in 2021. The limit was equal to $225,533 as of January 1,
2023, and it is indexed with inflation every year.
Police and Fire members may purchase increased benefits that are payable between the date of retirement and age
65.
A member is considered vested and will be eligible at minimum retirement age for a service retirement allowance if
they have contributions in each of five calendar years or have reached at least 50 years of age before ceasing
employment with a participating employer (age 45 for Police and Fire members). General Service employees may
retire after reaching age 55. Police and Fire members are eligible after reaching age 50. Tier One General Service
employee benefits are reduced if retirement occurs prior to age 58 with fewer than 30 years of service. Police and
Fire member benefits are reduced if retirement occurs prior to age 55 with fewer than 25 years of service. Tier Two
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 53
members are eligible for full benefits at age 60. The plans are closed to new members hired on or after August 29,
2003.
A judge member who has made contributions to PERS during each of five calendar years shall receive a retirement
allowance, payable monthly, for life. Before reaching age 60, judge members must choose the calculation formula
under which they will retire. The election is irrevocable after the member attains age 60. The two formulas, A and B,
are described in the following paragraph.
The Plan A retirement allowance for judge members is computed by multiplying 2.8125% by the final average salary
for the first 16 years of service and 1.67% of the final average salary multiplied by the number of years of service as
a judge in excess of 16. For most judge members, the maximum amount is limited to 65% of final average salary.
The Plan B retirement allowance for judge members is computed by multiplying 3.75% by the final average salary
for the first 16 years of service and 2.0% of the final average salary multiplied by the number of years of service as a
judge in excess of 16. For most judge members, the maximum amount is limited to 75% of final average salary. Plan
B requires a judge to serve up to 35 days per year for a period of five years as a pro tem judge. There is no actuarial
reduction for retirement under Plan B before age 65.
b. D eath  Benefits
Upon the death of a nonretired member, the beneficiary receives a lump-sum refund of the member’s account
balance (accumulated contributions and interest). In addition, the beneficiary receives a lump-sum payment from
employer funds equal to the account balance, provided one or more of the following conditions are met:
• The member was employed by a PERS employer at the time of death.
• The member died within 120 days after termination of PERS-covered employment.
• The member died as a result of injury sustained while employed in a PERS-covered job.
• The member was on an official leave of absence from a PERS-covered job at the time of death.
A member’s beneficiary may choose a monthly payment for life instead of the lump-sum or a combination of lump-
sum and monthly payments, if eligible. The monthly payment must be a minimum of $200 per month for deaths that
occur after July 30, 2003.
As of 2020, the Legislature introduced an Optional Spouse Death Benefit (OSDB) which may provide a higher
survivor benefit than the standard pre-retirement death benefit described above. To be eligible for the OSDB, the
member must have died before retiring, named their spouse or other person who is constitutionally required to be
treated in the same manner as the spouse as their pre-retirement beneficiary, and met the following conditions:
• Me mber’s  date of death must be on or after January 1, 2020.
• Member’s account must be eligible for the employer-matching death benefit (as described above).
• Member must have a surviving spouse.
• Surviving spouse must be member’s sole beneficiary as determined by a valid Tier One/Tier Two Pre-
retirement Beneficiary Designation form on file with PERS.
Surviving spouse must make written election no later than 60 days after member’s date of death. For members who
die before their earliest retirement date, the OSDB is the actuarial equivalent of 50% of the service retirement that
would have been paid to the member, calculated as if the member became inactive on their date of death and
retired at their earliest retirement date. For members who die after their earliest retirement date but before normal
retirement age, the OSDB is the actuarial equivalent of the service retirement that would have been paid to the
member calculated as if they retired on the first day of the month following their death. For members who die after
their normal retirement age, the OSDB is the actuarial equivalent of the benefit that would have been paid to the
member, calculated as if the member retired on the first day of the month following their date of death.
The s urviving  spouse or other person may elect to delay payment of the death benefit, but payment must
commence no later than December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have reached the age of
their federally required minimum distribution.
54 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
c. Disability Benefits
A member with 10 or more years of creditable service who becomes disabled from other than duty-connected
causes may receive a non-duty disability benefit. A disability resulting from a job-incurred injury or illness qualifies a
member (including PERS judge members) for disability benefits regardless of the length of PERS-covered service.
Upon qualifying for either a non-duty or duty disability, service time for General Service members is computed to
age 58 (55 for Police and Fire members) when determining the monthly benefit.
Judge members of PERS who have served a minimum of six consecutive years and who become physically or
mentally incapacitated are entitled to benefits as provided in ORS 238.555.
d. Benefit Changes After Retirement
Members may choose to continue participation in their variable account after retiring and may experience annual
benefit fluctuations caused by changes in the fair value of the underlying global equity investments of that account.
Under ORS 238.360, monthly benefits are adjusted annually through cost-of-living adjustments (COLA), starting
with the monthly benefits received or entitled to be received on August 1. The COLA is capped at 2.0%.
2. OPSRP PENSION PROGRAM
a. Pension Benefits
This portion of OPSRP provides a life pension funded by employer contributions. Benefits are calculated with the
following formula for members who attain normal retirement age.
Police and Fire: 1.8% multiplied by the number of years of service and the final average salary. Normal retirement
age for Police and Fire members is age 60 or age 53 with 25 years of retirement credit. To retire under the Police
and Fire classification, the individual’s last 60 months of retirement credit preceding retirement eligibility must be
classified as retirement credit for service as a police officer or a firefighter. General Service: 1.5% multiplied by the
number of years of service and the final average salary. Normal retirement age for General Service members is age
65 or age 58 with 30 years of retirement credit.
Under Senate Bill 1049, passed during the 2019 legislative session, the salary included in the determination of final
average salary is limited for all members beginning in 2021. The limit was equal to $225,533 as of January 1, 2023,
and is indexed with inflation every year.
A member of the pension program becomes vested on the earliest of the following dates: the date the member
completes 600 hours of service in each of five calendar years, the date the member reaches normal retirement age,
or, if the pension program is terminated, the date on which termination becomes effective.
b. Death Benefits
Upon the death of a nonretired member, the spouse or other person who is constitutionally required to be treated in
the same manner as the spouse receives for life 50% of the pension that would otherwise have been paid to the
deceased member. The surviving spouse or other person may elect to delay payment of the death benefit, but
payment must commence no later than December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have reached
the age of their federally required minimum distribution.
c. Disability Benefits
A member who has accrued 10 or more years of retirement credits before the member becomes disabled or a
member who becomes disabled from a job-related injury shall receive a disability benefit of 45% of the member’s
salary determined as of the last full month of employment before the disability occurred.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 55
3. INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PROGRAM (IAP)
a. Benefit Terms
The IAP is an individual account-based program under the PERS tax-qualified governmental plan as defined under
ORS 238A.400. An IAP member becomes vested on the date the employee account is established.
Employers have the option to make employer contributions for a member under ORS 238A.340. Contributions for
these accounts are deposited into a separate employer-funded account. The member becomes vested in this
optional employer-funded account on the earliest of the following dates: the date the member completes 600 hours
of service in each of five calendar years, the date the member reaches normal retirement age, the date the IAP is
terminated, the date the active member becomes disabled, or the date the active member dies. The accounts fall
under Internal Revenue Code Section 414(k).
Upon retirement, a member of the IAP may receive the amounts in his or her employee account, rollover account,
and vested employer-funded account as a lump-sum payment or in equal installments over a 5-, 10-, 15-, or 20-year
period or an anticipated life-span option. Installment amounts vary with market returns as the account remains
invested while in distribution. When chosen, the distribution option must result in a $200 minimum distribution
amount, or the frequency of the installments will be adjusted to reach that minimum.
b. Death Benefits
Upon the death of a nonretired member, the beneficiary receives in a lump sum the member’s account balance,
rollover account balance, and vested employer optional contribution account balance. If a retired member dies
before the installment payments are completed, the beneficiary may receive the remaining installment payments or
choose a lump-sum payment.
c. Recordkeeping
PERS contracts with Voya Financial to maintain IAP participant records.
4. POSTEMPLOYMENT HEALTHCARE BENEFITS
ORS 238.420 established the Retirement Health Insurance Account (RHIA) and authorizes a payment of up to $60
from RHIA toward the monthly cost of health insurance for eligible PERS members. RHIA is a cost-sharing, multiple-
employer OPEB plan for 897 participating employers. The plan was closed to new entrants hired on or after
August 29, 2003.
To be eligible to receive this monthly payment toward the premium costs, the member must: (1) have eight years or
more of qualifying service in PERS at the time of retirement or receive a disability allowance as if the member had
eight years or more of creditable service in PERS, (2) receive both Medicare Parts A and B coverage, and (3) enroll
in a PERS-sponsored health plan.
A su rviving spouse or dependent of a deceased PERS retiree who was eligible to receive the subsidy is eligible to
receive the subsidy if he or she (1) is receiving a retirement benefit or allowance from PERS or (2) was insured at
the time the member died and the member retired before May 1, 1991.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, PERS employers contributed 0.05% of PERS-covered salaries for Tier One
and Tier Two members to fund the normal cost portion of RHIA benefits. No unfunded actuarial liability (UAL) rate
was assigned for the RHIA program as it was funded over 100% as of December 31, 2019. Typically, PERS
employers contribute an actuarially determined percent of all PERS-covered salaries to amortize the unfunded
actuarial accrued liability over a fixed period with new unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities being amortized over 10
years. These rates were based on the December 31, 2019, actuarial valuation. This is included in the employer
contribution rates listed in Table 3.
56 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Employer contributions are advance funded on an actuarially determined basis. There is no inflation assumption for
RHIA postemployment benefits because the payment amount is set by statute and is not adjusted for increases in
health care costs. The number of inactive plan RHIA participants receiving benefits was 40,703 for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2023, and there were 34,508 active and 11,710 inactive members who met the requirements to
receive RHIA benefits when they retire.
ORS 238.415 established the Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA). It requires the PERS Board
(Board) on or before January 1 of each year to calculate the average difference between the health insurance
premiums paid by retired state employees under contracts entered into by the Board and health insurance
premiums paid by active state employees. ORS 238.415 authorizes payment of this average difference to qualified
retired state employees. Retired state employees are qualified to receive this benefit if they had eight or more years
of qualifying service with a state agency in the System at the time of retirement, or are receiving a disability pension
calculated as if they had eight or more years of qualifying service but are not eligible for federal Medicare coverage.
RHIPA is a single-employer (the state as one employer) defined-benefit OPEB plan and is closed to new entrants
hired on or after August 29, 2003.
A non-Medicare e ligible surviving spouse or dependent of a deceased, retired state employee is eligible to receive
the subsidy if they (1) are receiving a retirement benefit or allowance from PERS or (2) were insured at the time the
member died, and the member retired on or after September 29, 1991.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, state agencies contributed 0.05 and 0.11% of PERS-covered salaries for
Tier One and Tier Two members to fund the normal cost portion of RHIA and RHIPA benefits, respectively. State
agencies contributed 0.17% of all PERS-covered salaries to amortize the unfunded actuarial accrued liability of the
RHIPA program over a fixed period with new unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities being amortized over 10 years.
The first 10-year amortization base for outstanding RHIA and RHIPA UAL amounts began December 31, 2007.
These rates were based on the December 31, 2019, actuarial valuation. This is included in the employer
contribution rates listed in Table 3.
The number of inactive-plan RHIPA participants receiving benefits was 529 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023.
As of June 30, 2023, there were 9,716 active members who met the requirements to receive RHIPA benefits when
they retire. Inactive members are not eligible for these benefits. All subsidy payments from the RHIA and RHIPA are
initially deposited in the Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account, as described in Note 8 on page 86, and
subsequently remitted to the appropriate PERS health plan.
TABLE 3
Contribution
Rate Summary1
Employee IAP 6.00 % 6.00 % 6 .00 % 6.00 % 0.00 % 6.00 % 6.00 % 0.00 % 0.00 %
Employee
Normal Cost 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Employer
Normal Cost 15.32 15.41 13.45 16.87 19.65 8.64 13.00 0.05 0.11
Unfunded Actuarial
Liability 5.04 12.67 14.09 11.77 4.91 1.69 1.69 0.00 0.17
Total Employer
Contributions 20.36 % 28.08 % 27.54 % 28.64 % 24.56 % 10.33 % 14.69 % 0.05 % 0.28 %
1Group average rates shown are effective July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2023. 5Normal cost rates are charged on Tier 1 and Tier 2 payroll only.
2A subcomponent of the State and Local Government Rate Pool; includes UAL payment rate offset. 6UAL rates are charged on all payroll, including OPSRP.
3Does not include UAL payment rate offsets.
4Non-pooled Political Subdivisions are valued separately for the Defined Benefit Plan.
Service Fire
State Government Political General Police and
Agencies2 Rate Pool3 School Pool3 Subdivisions3,4 Judiciary
Pooled Employers Non-Pooled Employers All Employers All Employers State Agencies
State and Local
Defined Benefit Pension Postemployment Healthcare
PERS Defined Benefit Plan OPSRP Pension Program RHIA5,6 RHIPA5,6
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 57
5. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
Deferred compensation plans are authorized under Internal Revenue Code Section 457. The Oregon Legislature
enacted Chapter 179, Oregon Laws 1997, which established the Deferred Compensation Fund. ORS 243.400 to
243.507 established and provided for PERS to administer the state deferred compensation plan, known as the
Oregon Savings Growth Plan (OSGP). As of June 30, 2023, the fair value of investments was $2,798.7 million.
The plan is a benefit available to all state employees. To participate, an employee executes an individual agreement
with the state deferring current earnings to be paid at a future date. Participants in the plan are not required to pay
federal and state income taxes on the deferred contributions and earnings until the funds are received. Participants
or their beneficiaries cannot receive the funds until at least one of the following occurs: termination by reason of
resignation, death, disability, or retirement; unforeseeable emergency; or by requesting a de minimis distribution
from inactive accounts valued less than $5,000. A loan program is also available for eligible participants. Member
loans receivable on June 30, 2023, totaled $13.1 million. Of that amount, $10.5 million is not expected to be
collected within one year.
PERS c ontracts  with Voya Financial to maintain OSGP participant records. The Oregon State Treasury, as
custodian of the assets, also contracts with State Street Corporation to provide financial services. There are 20
investment options (core investment options) with varying degrees of market risk. Up to five financial institutions
provide investment services in mutual funds for each investment option. A participant receives a blend of these
mutual funds within the investment option. Participants direct the selection of investment options and bear any
market risk. OSGP also offers a self-directed brokerage option that permits a participant to establish a brokerage
account with Charles Schwab and participate in investment products other than core investment options. The
Oregon State Treasury has no liability for losses under the plan but does have the prudent investor responsibility of
due care. Total membership as of June 30, 2023, was 31,567.
PERS may assess a charge to the participants not to exceed 2.0% on amounts deferred, both contributions and
investment earnings, to cover costs incurred for administering the program. Actual charges to participants, including
investment charges, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, averaged 0.19% of amounts deferred. Oregon Revised
Statute 243.505 established a Deferred Compensation Advisory Committee to provide input to the PERS Board.
This committee is composed of seven members who meet at least quarterly.
6. STANDARD RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE ACCOUNT
ORS 238.410 established the Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account (SRHIA), a public entity risk pool. SRHIA
is both a risk-sharing and insurance-purchasing pool. The PERS Board contracts for medical and hospital insurance
on behalf of retired members. Members and their dependents are eligible for PERS health care coverage if the
member is receiving a retirement allowance or benefit under the System. A surviving spouse or dependent of a
PERS retiree is eligible to participate if he or she was covered under the health plan at the time of the retiree’s
death. As of June 30, 2023, there were 50,103 retirees and their dependents participating in the health insurance
program.
PERS contracts with various contracted health plans (CHP) on a fully insured, conventionally funded insurance
basis and remits premiums collected from participating members to the CHPs monthly. PERS contracts with Delta
Dental of Oregon under a minimum premium arrangement. Under the minimum premium program, Delta Dental of
Oregon agrees to split the rate into an agreed upon fixed claims rate (referred to as maximum premium) and an
agreed upon fixed amount to cover non-claims related costs (referred to as the minimum premium). In addition,
claims are invoiced on a weekly basis as Delta Dental makes payments for services delivered to covered PERS
members. A settlement is required after calendar year end to reconcile that the claims payments did not exceed the
contractual maximum liability established during the annual renewal process. The current estimate of incurred but
not reported (IBNR) for Delta Dental of Oregon insurance claims is $876,000.
D. CONTRIBUTIONS
PERS’ funding policy provides for periodic member and employer contributions at rates established by the PERS
Board, subject to limits set in statute. The rates established for member and employer contributions were approved
based on the recommendations of the System’s third-party actuary.
58 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
1. MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS
Beginning January 1, 2004, all member contributions, except for contributions by judge members, were placed in the
OPSRP Individual Account Program (IAP). Prior to that date, all member contributions were credited to the Defined
Benefit Pension Plan. Member contributions are set by statute at 6.0 or 7.0% of salary and are remitted by
participating employers. The contributions are either deducted from member salaries or paid by the employers on
the members’ behalf.
The Member Reserve, described in Note 6.A., represents accumulated member contributions and earnings
allocations made prior to January 1, 2004, and subsequent earnings allocations less refunds and amounts
transferred to reserves for retirements and disabilities, in addition to judge employee contributions (ORS 238.515).
The IAP member accounts represent member contributions made on or after January 1, 2004, plus earnings
allocations less disbursements for refunds, death benefits, and retirements.
Starting July 1, 2020, Senate Bill 1049 required a portion of member contributions to their IAP accounts to be
redirected to the Defined Benefit fund. In 2023, if the member earns more than $3,570 per month, 0.75% (if OPSRP
member) or 2.5% (if Tier One/Tier Two member) of the member's contributions that were previously contributed to
the member’s IAP now fund the new Employee Pension Stability Accounts (EPSA). The EPSA accounts will be used
to fund the cost of future pension benefits without changing those benefits, which means reduced contributions to
the member’s IAP account. Members may elect to make voluntary IAP contributions equal to the amount redirected.
a. Employee Pension Stability Accounts
EPSA was created by the Oregon Legislature through Senate Bill 1049 (2019) to address the increasing cost of
funding pension benefits. EPSA’s function is to help pay for part of an applicable member’s lifetime monthly pension
benefit when they retire.
EPSA rules apply to most PERS members, but the EPSA redirect is only triggered when the member’s gross pay in
a month exceeds the monthly salary threshold, tied to the annual Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers,
West Region). EPSA accounts are credited with investment earnings and losses annually and have no guaranteed
rate of return. Tier One and Tier Two EPSA accounts earn the Tier Two rate, and OPSRP EPSA accounts earn the
OPRSP Plan rate. Tier One, Tier Two, and OPSRP members may have EPSA account balances eligible for
withdrawal if the member stops working for all PERS-covered employers and/or all control groups under a PERS-
covered employer and is not yet eligible for service retirement. OPSRP pension plan members who withdraw their
EPSA and IAP will completely cancel membership in OP SR P, including forfeiting all accumulated retirement or
service credit and potential retirement benefits. The redirect to EPSA remains in effect when the PERS system is
less than 90% funded.
b. Target-Date Funds
The Oregon Investment Council, responsible for all PERS fund investments, approved the transition to a target-date
fund (TDF) investment methodology for all IAP accounts beginning January 1, 2018. This change in investment
methodology reflects an investment best practice that will better protect participants from potential losses as they
approach and enter retirement by gradually reducing investment risk as participants age. Participants are placed in
a TDF based on their year of birth. Investments in each fund adjust over time to reduce investment risk and potential
losses in market downturns. As the participant moves toward retirement, the investments in the fund gradually shift,
becoming more conservative to help protect against market fluctuations.
Effective January 1, 2021, Senate Bill 1049 (2019) allowed members to elect investment of their IAP account in
a TDF other than the default TDF based on their year of birth. PERS now provides members the opportunity to
make elections once a year during the month of September, with the change effective the following calendar
year.
2. EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS
PERS funding policy provides for monthly employer contributions at actuarially determined rates. These
contributions, expressed as a percentage of covered payroll, are intended to accumulate sufficient assets to pay
benefits when due. This funding policy applies to the PERS Defined Benefit Plan and OPEB plans. Employer
contribution rates during fiscal year 2023 were based on the December 31, 2019, actuarial valuation, which became
effective July 1, 2021. The State of Oregon and certain schools, community colleges, and political subdivisions have
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 59
made supplemental unfunded actuarial liability payments, and their rates have been reduced. See the contribution
rate summary provided in Table 3.  Effective January 1, 2020, Senate Bill 1049 requires employers to pay
contributions on reemployed PERS retirees’ salaries as if they were active members, excluding IAP (6%)
contributions. Reemployed retirees do not accrue additional benefits while they work after retirement.
a. PERS Defined Benefit Plan (ORS 238)
Effective July 1, 2021, the contribution rate for state agencies was 20.36%, the State and Local Government Rate
Pool was 28.08%, School Districts Pool was 27.54%, and judiciary was 24.56% of PERS-covered salaries. Political
subdivisions that have not joined the State and Local Government Rate Pool had an average pension rate of
28.64%.
Oregon Laws 2001, Chapter 945, Section 13 authorized the establishment of the State and Local Government Rate
Pool. Local political subdivisions were given the option to join the State of Oregon and community colleges for the
actuarial purpose of calculating employer rates. Participation by local political subdivisions in this pool was effective
for the actuarial valuation period beginning January 1, 2002. Oregon Laws 2001, Chapter 945, Section 13
authorized the establishment of the School Districts Pool. Local political subdivisions were given the option to join
the State of Oregon and community colleges for the actuarial purpose of calculating employer rates while all
education service districts, school districts, and charter schools were/are required to join the School Districts Pool.
Participation in these pools was effective for the actuarial valuation period beginning January 1, 2002.
Based on the a ctuarial valuation as of December 31, 2019, the state agencies, the judiciary, and political
subdivisions all had increases in employer contribution rates on July 1, 2021, while schools had a decrease in
employer contribution rates. These rate changes are measured against the actual average rates paid since the last
rate-setting valuation. Every two years, the PERS Board adjusts contributions so that, over time, those contributions
will be sufficient to fund the benefits earned if earnings follow assumptions.
b. OPSRP Pension Program (ORS 238A)
All PERS-participating employers with OPSRP Pension Program members are actuarially pooled and share the
same contribution rate. The OPSRP Pension Program employer rates effective July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2023,
are 10.33% of covered salaries for General Service employees and 14.69% of covered salaries for Police and Fire
employees. These rates increased from 9.85% of covered salaries for General Service and 14.48% of covered
salaries for Police and Fire employees for the period July 1, 2019, through June 30, 2021. Each of these rates
includes a component related to disability benefits for General Service and Police and Fire members.
Note 3 – Receivables and Payables
A. RECEIVABLES
Table 4 disaggregates accounts receivable balances reported in the Statement of Fiduciary Net Position.
TABLE 4
Accounts Receivable
Broker Receivables 3,517,499,438$
Transition Liability 243,198,241
Interest and Dividends Receivable 284,028,686
Employer and Member Receivables 164,786,789
Member Loans 13,128,058
Other 15,110,242
Total Accounts Receivable 4,237,751,454$
June 30, 2023
60 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
B. PAYABLES
Table 5 disaggregates payable balances reported in the Statement of Fiduciary Net Position as Investment
Purchases and Accrued Expenses.
Note 4 - Investments
The Oregon State Treasury is the investment officer for the State of Oregon. Investment standards are established
in ORS 293.726 and require funds to be managed as a prudent investor would do. The Oregon Investment Council
(OIC) establishes policies for the investment and reinvestment of moneys in the Oregon Public Employees
Retirement Fund. Policies are established based on the primary investment asset class of each investment manager
and do not reflect the classifications of individual holdings as presented in the financial statements. Contracts with
individual investment managers provide additional guidelines that vary from manager to manager.
A. DEPOSITS
PERS cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand, deposits in the Oregon Short Term Fund (OSTF),
moneys held by external investment managers, cash equivalents held by the health insurance provider, and cash
held by the IAP program custodian. OSTF is a cash and investment pool that operates as a demand deposit
account. All state funds are required to use OSTF. See Table 6.
OSTF is separately aud ited by the Oregon Audits Division. The audited financial statements are available at:
https://sos.oregon.gov/audits/Documents/2023-27.pdf. OSTF investment risks are addressed in the notes to those
financial statements.
The Health Insurance Claims Fund had a balance of $2.4 million as of June 30, 2023, which was held at U.S. Bank.
The account is identified as Public Funds; therefore, any amount in the account above the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) limit was collateralized by the Public Funds Collateralization Program.
TABLE 5
Accounts Payable
June 30, 2023
Broker Payable 5,181,186,712$
Pension Roll 457,433,888
Investment Fees 22,335,591
Death Benefits 38,342,050
Compensated Absences 3,054,650
Services and Supplies 2,479,083
Other 5,133,727
Total Accounts Payable 5,709,965,701$
TABLE 6
Depository Account Bank Balance
Insured  $          750,000
Oregon Short Term Fund     1,357,202,980
Health Insurance Claims Fund           2,107,720
IAP On Demand Deposit           5,584,034
Uninsured and Uncollateralized     1,173,119,685
Total Deposits  $ 2,538,764,419
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 61
1. CUSTODIAL CREDIT RISK
Custodial credit risk for deposits is the risk that in the event of a bank failure, PERS’ deposits may not be recovered.
As noted in section A, Deposits, the deposit and investment risks, including custodial risk, of the OSTF deposits are
outlined in the OSTF financial statements. As of June 30, 2023, the carrying amount of PERS’ deposits in OSTF
totaled $1,724.4 million and the corresponding bank balance was $1,357.5 million. Investment managers’ deposits
with custodian banks consist of cash and cash equivalents that represent buying reserves. As of June 30, 2023,
there was as sum of $1,173.4 million on deposit for the accounts of the OPERF investment managers.
As of June 30, 2023, the IAP On Demand Deposit Account of $5.8 million was held at State Street Bank, the
custodian of the IAP program third-party administrator. The balance on the deposit is insured by the FDIC up to the
standard maximum deposit insurance amount. The balance in excess of the FDIC limit was uninsured and
uncollateralized.
2. FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK
Foreign currency risk for deposits is the risk that changes in exchange rates will adversely affect the fair value of the
deposits. Foreign currency risk is controlled via contractual agreements with the investment managers. As of
June 30, 2023, the sum of $151.6 million in cash and cash equivalents was exposed to foreign currency risk. The
U.S. dollar balances of these deposits, organized by currency denomination, are presented in Table 12.
3. RESTRICTED CASH EQUIVALENTS
PERS’ cash and cash equivalents as of June 30, 2023, include collateral of $359.7 million held by investment
managers. Swap collateral is offset by a related liability with a net settlement feature. Collateral is restricted and is
not available to pay current liabilities.
B. INVESTMENTS
Table 7 lists the fair value of investments held by the state of Oregon for PERS as of June 30, 2023.
62 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
1. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Observable inputs are developed based on
market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity. Unobservable inputs are developed based
on the best information available about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset.
The classification of investments within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the activity level in the market for the
security type and the inputs used to determine their fair value. The three levels of the hierarchy are described below:
• Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
• Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar
instruments in markets that are not active, and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs are
observable.
TABLE 7
Investments as of June 30, 2023 Fair Value
U.S. Treasury Obligations  $    8,254,816,295
U.S. Treasury Obligations - Strips 178,980,526
U.S. Treasury Obligations - TIPS 49,491,441
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage Securities 1,052,528,812
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage TBAs 1,152,458,716
U.S. Federal Agency Debt 129,212,317
U.S. Federal Agency Strips 574,858
International Debt Securities 1,107,925,547
Non-U.S. Government Debt Securities 1,188,250,728
Corporate Bonds 1,830,329,917
Bank Loans 1,279,434,469
Municipal Bonds 38,810,930
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 555,351,144
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities 89,634,975
Asset-Backed Securities 529,215,498
Guaranteed Investment Contracts1 310,740,706
Domestic Fixed Income Funds 965,472,827
Global Fixed Income Funds 881,229,563
Repurchase Agreements 188,000,000
Total Debt Securities 19,782,459,269
Derivatives in Asset Positions 87,004,722
Domestic Equity Securities 10,737,408,507
International Equity Securities 6,215,692,031
Domestic Equity Funds 3,511,250,074
Global Equity Funds 712,375,479
International Equity Funds 840,431,576
Target Date Funds 877,200,620
Oregon Savings Growth Plan - Self Directed 44,770,644
Total Public Equity 23,026,133,653
Real Estate and Real Estate Investment Trusts 13,481,577,315
Private Equity 26,188,039,823
Real Assets 8,980,367,543
Diversifying Strategies 4,918,880,547
Opportunity Portfolio 2,449,303,169
Total PERS Investments - Fiduciary Funds 98,826,761,319$
1Guranteed Investment Contracts are stated at contract value.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 63
• Level 3 – Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are unobservable.
Inputs used to measure fair value might fall in different levels of the fair value hierarchy. Categorization within the
hierarchy is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Equity securities are generally valued based on quoted prices from an active market and are therefore categorized
in level 1. In the absence of quoted market prices, such as equity securities that trade infrequently or not at all,
valuations are based on the last traded price or a price provided by investment managers and are generally
categorized in level 3.
Debt securities classified as level 2 are valued using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent
pricing vendors. The third-party vendors use a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate
relevant observable market data to arrive at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace would pay for a security
under current market conditions. When independent price sources are not available, debt securities are priced
based on the last traded price or a valuation provided by the investment manager and are categorized in level 3.
Funds priced using a net asset value ("NAV") that is published daily and validated with a sufficient level of
observable activity are categorized in level 1. If observable activity is limited yet supports that the NAV represents an
exit value of the security at the measurement date, the securities are categorized in level 2. Investments that are
measured at NAV as a practical expedient, such as most private equity, real assets, diversifying strategies,
opportunity, and real estate investments, are excluded from the fair value hierarchy if the NAV per share (or its
equivalent) was calculated in a manner consistent with the Financial Accounting Standards Board's measurement
principles for investment companies. Funds not meeting these criteria are categorized in level 3.
Exchange-traded derivatives, including futures, rights, and warrants, that are actively traded are valued using
quoted prices are categorized in level 1. Derivative contract valuations, such as swaps and options, are modeled
using observable pricing inputs and techniques that do not entail material subjectivity and are therefore categorized
in level 2. Level 3 derivatives include securities valued at a price that has been determined by the investment
manager's valuation committee.
Investments in real estate, other than real estate investment trusts, which are generally valued based on an active
market price and are categorized in level 1, have been valued based on the NAV per share (or its equivalent), as
provided by the general partner. This type includes 66 commingled real estate funds, structured as limited
partnerships, where the funds have a finite term. Distributions from the funds will be received as the underlying
investments of the funds are liquidated. Liquidation is expected to take place during the five-year period following
the termination of the investment period, which extends to 2037. Investments in real estate also include 16 joint
ventures in which investments are expected to be held for the long term and generate cash flow that will represent a
significant component of the total return. Real estate also includes investments in 16 open-ended funds that permit
quarterly redemption of shares, subject to certain requirements being met.
Private equity consists of approximately 212 funds, organized as limited partnerships and limited liability companies,
participating in diversified strategies including leveraged-buyouts, venture capital, growth equity, fund-of-funds, co-
investments and special situations. The fair values of the private equity investments have been determined using
the NAV per share (or its equivalent) as provided by the general partner or managing member. These funds have a
finite term. Distributions will be received as the underlying investments of the funds are liquidated, which is expected
to occur over the next 12 to 14 years.
Real asset and diversifying asset investments seek to provide diversification and inflation-hedging characteristics to
the fund. They include investments with a focus on infrastructure and natural resources. Real assets consist of 94
investments in commingled funds organized as limited partnerships and limited liability companies. The fair values
of the investments have been determined using a NAV per share (or its equivalent) of the investments. For real
asset infrastructure and natural resource investments, which include 78 of the 94 funds, the funds have a finite term.
Distributions will be received as the underlying investments of the funds are liquidated, which is expected to occur
over the next 10 to 14 years. The remaining 16 funds are open-ended, permitting periodic redemption of shares,
subject to certain requirements being met. These 16 funds are invested in diversifying hedge strategies.
The opportunity portfolio includes strategies that fall outside of other asset classes and include 23 funds investing in a
broad range of performing and distressed debt and debt related securities as well as royalties and insurance-based
64 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
investments. The fair values of the investments have been determined using a NAV per share (or its equivalent) of the
investments. For 16 of the 23 funds, the funds have a finite term. Distributions will be received as the underlying
investments of the funds are liquidated, which is expected to occur over the next 7 to 10 years. The remaining seven funds
are open-ended, permitting periodic redemption of shares.
PERS has recurring fair value measurements as of June 30, 2023, shown in Table 8. Disclosures regarding redemption
and investments valued at the NAV per share (or its equivalent), including Unfunded Commitments, are presented in Table
9.
TABLE 8
Investments and Derivative Instruments Measured at Fair Value
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
Significant
Unobservable
Inputs
6/30/2023 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3)
Investments by Fair Value Level
Debt Securities
U.S. Treasury Obligations 8,254,816,295$        –$                       8,254,816,295$        –$
U.S. Treasury Obligations - Strips 178,980,526 –                         178,980,526            –
U.S. Treasury Obligations - TIPS 49,491,441 –                         49,491,441              –
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage Securities 1,052,528,812 –                         1,052,528,812         –
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage TBAs 1,152,458,716 –                         1,152,458,716         –
U.S. Federal Agency Debt 129,212,317 –                         129,212,317            –
U.S. Federal Agency Strips 574,858 –                         574,858                   –
Non-Government Debt Securities 1,188,250,728 –                         1,188,250,728         –
Corporate Bonds 2,268,797,528 –                         2,207,182,645         61,614,883
Bank Loans 1,374,675,440 –                         889,906,245            484,769,195
Municipal Bonds 38,810,930 –                         38,810,930              –
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 691,654,949 –                         690,947,105            707,844
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities 89,634,975 –                         89,634,975              –
Asset-Backed Securities 967,128,658 –                         917,570,704            49,557,954
Domestic Fixed Income Funds 965,472,827 –                         965,472,827            –
Global Fixed Income Funds 881,229,563 –                         881,229,563            –
Repurchase Agreements 188,000,000 –                         188,000,000            –
Total Debt Securities1 19,471,718,563 –                         18,875,068,687 596,649,876
Public Equity
Domestic Equity Securities 10,737,408,507 10,687,141,729        27,208                     50,239,570
International Equity Securities 6,215,692,031 6,209,662,575         –                         6,029,456
Domestic Equity Funds 3,511,250,074 –                         3,511,250,074         –
Global Equity Funds 712,375,479 –                         712,375,479            –
International Equity Funds 840,431,576 684,787,095            155,584,994            59,487
Target Date Fund 877,200,620 –                         877,200,620            –
Oregon Savings Growth Plan - Self Directed 44,770,644 44,770,644              –                         –
Total Public Equity 22,939,128,931 17,626,362,043 5,256,438,375 56,328,513
Real Estate Investment Trusts 522,529,505 522,529,505            –                         –
Total Investments by Fair Value Level 42,933,376,999$      18,148,891,548$      24,131,507,062$      652,978,389$
TABLE 8 continues on the next page
Fair Value Measurements Using
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 65
TABLE 8 continuing from the previous page
6/30/2023
Investments Measured at the Net Asset Value (NAV)
Real Estate
Real Estate Investments 9,696,355,905$
Real Estate Open-Ended Funds 3,262,691,905
Total Real Estate 12,959,047,810
Private Equity 26,188,039,823
Real Assets 8,980,367,543
Diversifying Strategies 4,918,880,547
Opportunity Portfolio
Opportunity Private Investments 1,262,012,265
Opportunity Open-Ended Funds 1,187,290,904
Total Opportunity Portfolio 2,449,303,169
Total Investments Measured at the NAV 55,495,638,892
Total Investments Measured at Fair Value 98,429,015,891$
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
Significant
Unobservable
Inputs
6/30/2023 (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3)
Investments Derivative Instruments
Credit Default Swaps 826,687$                 –$                       826,687$                 –$
Foreign Exchange Forwards (10,500,730) –                         (10,500,730)             –
Interest Rate Swaps 75,316,687 –                         75,316,687              –
Options 10,553,180 –                         10,553,180              –
Rights and Warrants 308,168 233,257                   74,911                     –
Total Assets 76,503,992 233,257 76,270,735 –
Credit Default Swaps (612,947) –                         (612,947)                  –
Foreign Exchange Forwards 127,781,898 –                         127,781,898            –
Interest Rate Swaps (74,108,045) –                         (74,108,045)             –
Options (1,210,995) –                         (1,210,995)               –
Total Liabilities 51,849,911 –                         51,849,911 –
Total Investments Derivative Instruments 128,353,903$          233,257$                 128,120,646$          –$
Invested Securities Lending Collateral
Asset-Backed Securities 43,911,817$            –$                       43,911,817$            –$
Negotiable Certificates of Deposit 128,223,910 –                         128,223,910            –
Commercial Paper 21,461,357 –                         21,461,357              –
Corporate Bonds 51,200,032 –                         51,200,032              –
U.S. Agency Securities 13,200,000 –                         13,200,000              –
Repurchase Agreements 351,292,000 –                         351,292,000            –
Total Invested Securities Lending Collateral2
609,289,116$          –$                       609,289,116$          –$
1Guaranteed Investment Contracts are excluded from the table as these are stated at contract value.
2 For OSTF's participation in securities lending activity of $315,118, refer to their audited financial statements at:
https://sos.oregon.gov/audits/Documents/2023-27.pdf
Fair Value Measurements Using
66 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
2. RATE OF RETURN
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, the annual money-weighted rate of return on defined benefit pension plan
investments, net of defined benefit pension plan investment expenses, was 2.97%. The annual money-weighted
rates of return on the other postemployment healthcare benefits (OPEB) investments, net of OPEB investment
expenses, were 3.08% for the Retirement Health Insurance Account (RHIA) and 3.73% for the Retiree Health
Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA). The money-weighted rate of return expresses investment performance, net of
investment expense, adjusted for the timing of cash flows and the changing amounts actually invested.
3. INVESTMENT CONCENTRATIONS
As of June 30, 2023, there were no organizations that represent 5% or more of the pension plan’s fiduciary net
position or total investments.
4. CREDIT RISK DEBT SECURITIES
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligations. OIC has no
formal policy regarding credit risk. As of June 30, 2023, the fair value of below-grade investments, excluding unrated
securities, is $1,743.1 million, or 16.0%, of total securities subject to credit risk and 8.81% of total debt securities.
The weighted quality rating average is AA-. Unrated securities include $577.3 million in bank loans, $1,457.0 million
in domestic and global fixed-income funds, $310.7 million in guaranteed investment contracts, and $838.9 million in
other debt securities. Unrated federal agency securities include $266.3 million in Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (FHLMC), $1,356.3 million in Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), and $209.2 million in
other federal agency securities. These federal agency securities are not rated by the credit rating agencies because
these are implicitly guaranteed by the U.S. government. Table 10 details the quality ratings for credit risk debt
securities as of June 30, 2023.
5. CUSTODIAL CREDIT RISK
Custodial credit risk for investments is the risk that in the event of a failure of the counterparty, PERS will not be able
to recover the value of the investments or collateral securities that are in the possession of an outside party. OIC
has no formal policy regarding the holding of securities by a custodian or counterparty. As of June 30, 2023,
investment securities (excluding cash, cash equivalents, and repurchase agreements held as securities lending
collateral) are registered and held in the name of the OIC for the benefit of PERS and are not exposed to custodial
credit risk.
TABLE 9
Investments Measured at the Net Asset Value
Fair Value
Unfunded
Commitments*
Redemption
Frequency (If
Currently Eligible)
Redemption
Notice Period
Real Estate
Real Estate Investments 9,696,355,905$     3,602,065,083$     n/a n/a
Real Estate Open-Ended Funds 3,262,691,905       187,209,491         Quarterly 15 - 90 days
Private Equity 26,188,039,823     6,660,950,911       n/a n/a
Real Assets 8,980,367,543       3,341,982,261       n/a n/a
Diversifying Strategies 4,918,880,547       -                       Monthly 3 - 90 days
Opportunity Portfolio
Opportunity Private Investments 1,262,012,265       656,501,949         n/a n/a
Opportunity Open-Ended Funds 1,187,290,904       493,613,160         Monthly, Quarterly 5 - 90 days
Total 55,495,638,892$   14,942, 322,855$
* Excludes unfunded commitments associated with investments included in the fair value hierarchy (Levels 1, 2, and 3)
and new commitments not yet funded at 6/30/2023.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 67
TABLE 10
Schedule of Credit Risk at June 30, 2023
Quality Rating Fair Value
AAA 1,222,054,583$
AA 471,619,445
A 969,411,310
BBB 1,473,216,345
BB 511,165,518
B 889,118,609
CCC 276,935,303
CC 56,489,789
C 624,386
D 8,760,576
Not Rated 3,183,868,614
Not Rated - U.S. Agency1 1,831,758,375
Total Subject to Credit Risk 10,895,022,853
U.S.
Government Guaranteed Securities 8,887,436,416
Total Debt Securities 19,782,459,269$
1 Federal Agency securities are not rated by the credit rating agencies as
they carry an implicit guarantee of the U.S. Government. See Credit Risk
Debt Securities note disclosure on the previous page for more detail.
TABLE 11
Schedule of Interest Rate Risk - Effective Duration at June 30, 2023
Investments Fair Value
U.S. Treasury Obligations 8,254,816,295$    4.30
U.S. Treasury Obligations - Strips 178,980,526        0.76
U.S. Treasury Obligations - TIPS 49,491,441          3.93
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage Securities 1,052,528,812      6.16
U.S. Federal Agency Mortgage TBAs 1,152,458,716      4.66
U.S. Federal Agency Debt 129,212,317        3.53
U.S. Federal Agency Strips 574,858               22.48
International Debt Securities 1,107,613,045      7.86
Non-U.S. Government Debt Securities 1,188,250,728      4.29
Corporate Bonds 1,829,352,729      6.31
Bank Loans 1,263,164,526      7.36
Municipal Bonds 38,810,930          5.05
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 555,046,331        7.35
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities 89,634,975          9.56
Asset-Backed Securities 529,215,498        6.31
Domestic Fixed Income Funds 965,472,827        5.23
Global Fixed Income Funds 881,229,563        6.28
Repurchase Agreements 188,000,000        0.001
No Effective Duration:
International Debt Securities 312,502               N/A
Corporate Bonds 977,188               N/A
Bank Loans 16,269,943          N/A
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 304,813               N/A
Guaranteed Investment Contracts 310,740,706        N/A
Total Debt Securities 19,782,459,269
Cash Equivalent - Mutual Funds - STIF 720,277,489        25 days2
Cash Equivalent - Oregon Short Term Fund 962,177,547        152 days2
Total Subject to Interest Rate Risk 21,464,914,305$
10.002 year
2Weighted average maturity. Pools are not rated.
Effective Weighted
Duration Rate
(in years)
68 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
6. INTEREST RATE RISK
Interest rate risk is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment. This
risk is managed within the portfolio using the effective duration methodology. As of June 30, 2023, the weighted
average duration of PERS’ fixed-income portfolio was 5.24 years.
Effective duration is a measure of a fixed-income investment’s exposure to fair value changes arising from changes
in interest rates. Effective duration makes assumptions regarding the most likely timing and amounts of variable
cash flows. These assumptions take into consideration factors indicative of investments that are highly sensitive to
interest rate changes, including callable options, prepayments, and other factors. These factors are reflected in the
effective duration numbers provided herein. No individual fixed-income investment manager’s portfolio was outside
the policy guidelines as of June 30, 2023. Table 11 shows the investments by type, amount, and effective weighted
duration.
On June 30, 2023, PERS held approximately $1,697.5 million in debt instruments backed by pooled mortgages,
collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial mortgage-backed securities, or fixed-rate mortgages. These
securities represent a stream of principal and interest payments from underlying mortgages. Assets with these
characteristics are susceptible to prepayment by the mortgage holders, which may result in a decrease in total
interest realized. The value of these securities can be volatile as interest rates fluctuate. Additionally, the risk of
default exists, and collateral held may potentially be insufficient to cover the principal due. PERS also held
approximately $1,152.5 million in To-Be-Announced (TBA) federal agency-issued mortgage pools. An additional
$529.2 million of debt instruments held are asset-backed securities backed primarily by automobiles, consumer
credit receivables, student loan receivables, and heavy equipment leases.
7. FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK
Foreign currency risk is the risk that changes in exchange rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment
or a deposit. As of June 30, 2023, approximately 5.44% of the debt investment portfolio was invested in non-dollar
denominated securities. Policies for PERS’ portfolio do not limit non-dollar denominated investments. PERS utilizes
a currency overlay manager to reduce risk through offsetting investments in the developed foreign currency market
for international equity portfolios. See Table 12.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 69
8. UNFUNDED COMMITMENTS
OIC has entered into agreements that commit OPERF, upon request, to make additional investment purchases up to
a predetermined amount. As of June 30, 2023, the OPERF had $4,201.8 million in commitments to purchase real
estate investments and $9,627.3 million in commitments to purchase private equity investments, which include
$6,689.2 million in recallable distributions. There were $4,953.0 million in commitments to purchase real assets,
which includes $1,287.8 million in recallable distributions. Additionally, there were $1,300.1 million in commitments
to purchase opportunity portfolio investments, which include $692.1 million in recallable distributions. These
amounts are unfunded and are not recorded in the Statement of Fiduciary Net Position.
C. SECURITIES LENDING
In accordance with state investment policies, OPERF participates in securities lending transactions. Through
securities lending authorization agreements, the Oregon State Treasury has authorized its custodian, State Street
Bank, to lend its securities pursuant to the terms and conditions of policy and applicable agreements. Both OPERF
and the borrowers maintain the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand. During the period of
these financial statements, there were no significant violations of the provisions of securities lending agreements.
During the period of these financial statements, the custodian had the authority to loan short-term, fixed-income, and
equity securities and to receive as collateral U.S. dollar and foreign currency cash, U.S. government and agency
securities, letters of credit, and foreign sovereign debt of Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) countries. Borrowers were required to deliver collateral for each loan equal to or not less than 102% of the
TABLE 12
Currency Exposures by Asset Class in U.S. Dollar Equivalents as of June 30, 2023
Currency
Cash and Cash
Equivalents Debt Securities   Public Equity
Derivatives in
Asset Positions   Real Estate
Real Assets and
Diversifying
St
rategies Total
Argentine peso 1,297$                –$                  –$                     –$                  –$                  –$                  1,297$
Australian dollar 2,055,597           29,644,063         222,572,674         111,024              5,560,438           47,694,874         307,638,670
Brazilian real 435,811              –                    90,214,928           419,563              –                    –                    91,070,302
Canadian dollar 5,425,628           35,741,542         346,419,037         –                    145,367              –                    387,731,574
Chilean peso 18,820                –                    818,785                4,265,392           –                    –                    5,102,997
Chinese yuan renminbi 90,331,664         80,530,208         132,584,803         1,343,006           –                    –                    304,789,681
Colombian peso 11,962                -                     -                       –                    –                    –                    11,962
Czech koruna 29,696                1,566,469           -                       –                    –                    –                    1,596,165
Danish krone 168,715              2,043,348           158,600,866         –                    –                    –                    160,812,929
Egyptian pound 35,395                –                    2,953,004             -                     –                    –                    2,988,399
Euro  16,594,247         356,713,606       1,406,786,877       108,159              1,634,050           3,176,860,314    4,958,697,253
Hong Kong dollar 1,541,780           –                    338,548,393         –                    431,303              –                    340,521,476
Hungarian forint 619,352              4,131,297           2,073,599             –                    –                    –                    6,824,248
Indian rupee 16,932                –                    128,552,306         –                    –                    –                    128,569,238
Indonesian rupiah 981,115              19,545,260         46,519,308           –                    –                    –                    67,045,683
Israeli shekel 84,695                3,563,519           8,641,473             –                    –                    –                    12,289,687
Japanese yen  6,529,543           335,499,322       939,053,082         7,979,032           708,159              –                    1,289,769,138
Kuwaiti dinar 19,674                –                    428,188                –                    –                    –                    447,862
Malaysian ringgit 239,625              11,657, 237         3,887,752             423,086              –                    –                    16,207,700
Mexican peso  2,662,623           50,182,689         21,421,040           99,535                10,277,972         –                    84,643,859
New Taiwan dollar 1,101,351           -                     199,987,314         –                    -                     –                    201,088,665
New Zealand dollar 531,509              14,422,512         2,704,981             –                    –                    –                    17,659,002
Nigerian naira 2,439,368           -                     -                       –                    –                    –                    2,439,368
Norwegian krone 118,457              329,458              34,963,516           –                    –                    –                    35,411,431
Pakistani rupee 49,542                -                     1,827,884             –                    –                    –                    1,877,426
Peruvian nuevo sol 37,388                4,090,671           -                       –                    –                    –                    4,128,059
Philippine peso 23,620                -                     5,607,888             –                    –                    –                    5,631,508
Polish zloty 24,985                –                    11,017,781           275,183              –                    –                    11,317,949
Pound sterling  12,747,546         108,416,083       933,649,072         –                    275,110              49,474,203         1,104,562,014
Qatari rial 50,304                -                     4,049,333             –                    -                     -                     4,099,637
Romanian leu -                     765,309              -                       –                    –                    –                    765,309
Russian ruble 906,511              3,298,568           34,444,053           –                    –                    –                    38,649,132
Saudi Arabian riyal 1,651,693           -                     49,981,399           –                    84,863                –                    51,717,955
Singapore dollar 478,521              2,702,523           55,582,512           1,056                 15,408,615         –                    74,173,227
South African rand 99,859                6,999,444           36,872,446           29,449                -                     –                    44,001,198
South Korean won 2,033,297           -                     243,904,652         59,017,099         –                    –                    304,955,048
Swedish krona 168,477              –                    108,091,164         -                     -                     –                    108,259,641
Swiss franc 807,641              -                     342,210,701         -                     –                    –                    343,018,342
Thailand baht 484,598              3,760,598           28,112,461           -                     –                    –                    32,357,657
Turkish lira 14,458                –                    35,225,668           –                    –                    –                    35,240,126
United Arab Emirates dirham 7,456                 –                    10,950,726           –                    –                    –                    10,958,182
Vietnamese dong -                     –                    1,338,645             –                    –                    –                    1,338,645
Total Subject to Foreign
Currency Risk 151,580,752$     1,075, 603,726$   5,990,598,311$     74,071,584$       34,525,877$       3,274,029,391$   10,600,409,641$
70 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
fair value of loaned U.S. securities and international fixed-income securities, or 105% in the case of international
equity. The custodian did not have the ability to pledge or sell collateral securities absent a borrower default, and
OPERF did not impose any restrictions during the fiscal year on the amount of the loans the custodian made on its
behalf. OPERF is fully indemnified against losses caused by borrower default by its current custodian. There were
no losses during the fiscal year from the failure of borrowers to return loaned securities and no recoveries of
amounts from prior losses.
The maturities of investments made with cash collateral did not generally match the maturities of the securities
loaned. Because the securities loaned are callable on demand by either the lender or borrower, the life of the loans
on June 30, 2023, is effectively one day. On June 30, 2023, OPERF had no credit risk exposure to borrowers
because the amounts OPERF owes borrowers exceeds the amounts borrowers owe OPERF.
On June 30, 2023, the fair value of cash collateral received and invested cash collateral were each $607.6 million.
The cumulative unrealized gain in invested cash collateral of $18,836 has been recognized in securities lending
income in the Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position in the period in which the gain or losses occurred. For
the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, total income from securities lending activity was $22.0 million, and total
expenses for the period were $19.0 million for a net gain of $3.0 million.
Oregon Short Ter m Fund (OSTF) also participates in securities lending activity. OPERF receives an allocated
portion of this activity based on its deposits in OSTF. As of June 30, 2023, OPERF’s allocated portion of cash
collateral received and invested cash collateral were each $315,118.
Cash collateral received for OSTF securities lent is invested in securities lending collateral pools and is not exposed
to custodial risk. For more information on OSTF’s participation in securities lending activity, refer to their audited
financial statements: https://sos.oregon.gov/audits/Documents/2023-27.pdf.
Table 13 shows the combined balances of the securities on loan, cash and securities collateral received, and
investments of cash collateral held. Tables 14 and 15 disclose how the cash collateral received was invested.
Securities lending collateral subject to credit risk as of June 30, 2023, is shown in Table 14. Securities lending
collateral subject to interest rate risk as of June 30, 2023, is shown in Table 15.
TABLE 13
Securities Lending as of June 30, 2023
Securities on Loan Cash and Securities Investments of Cash
Investment Type at Fair Value Collateral Received Collateral at Fair Value
U.S. Treasury Securities 181,907,298$       185,369,553$          –$
U.S. Agency Securities 84,656,159           86,343,400             12,794,834
Domestic Equity Securities 485,619,475         493,590,463            465,428,853
Domestic Debt Securities 125,061,133         127,571,933            114,494,065
International Equity Securities 22,874,412           24,336,756             14,928,333
Allocation from Oregon Short Term Fund 4,331,825             4,419,789               315,118
Total 904,450,302$       921,631,894$          607,961,203$
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 71
TABLE 14
Securities Lending Invested Cash Collateral Subject to Credit Risk as of June 30, 2023
Quality Rating Fair Value
AAA 57,111,817$
AA1 148,225,445
A 164,659,854
Total Subject to Credit Risk 369,997,116
U.S. Government Guaranteed Repurchase Agreements 239,292,000
Allocation from Oregon Short Term Fund 315,118
Payable (1,643,031)
Total Securities Lending Invested Cash Collateral 607,961,203$
1 Commercial paper ratings of A+/A-1+/A-1 categorized as AA.
TABLE 15
Securities Lending Invested Cash Collateral Subject to Interest Rate Risk as of June 30, 2023
Effective
Weighted
Duration Rate
Security Type Fair Value (in days) 1
Asset-Backed Securities 43,911,817$           29
Negotiable Certificates of Deposit 128,223,910           84
Corporate Bonds 21,461,357            5
Commercial Paper 51,200,032            93
U.S. Agency Securities 13,200,000            4
Repurchase Agreements 112,000,000           2
Total Subject to Interest Rate Risk 369,997,116           29
U.S. Government Guaranteed Repurchase Agreements 239,292,000
Allocation from Oregon Short Term Fund 315,118
Payable (1,643,031)
Total Securities Lending Invested Cash Collateral 607,961,203$
1 Weighted average days to maturity or next reset date.
72 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
D. DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Oregon Investment Council policy allows, with some restrictions, for the use of derivative instruments in the prudent
management of OPERF investments. Certain internally and externally managed accounts are allowed, through
contract and policy, to invest in derivative instruments to carry out their investment management activities.
Risks inherent with derivatives are managed through investment management’s adherence to contractual and policy
prescribed terms that are consistent with OPERF’s investing objectives.
All derivative instruments held by OPERF are considered investments. The fair value of OPERF derivative
investments is reported in the Investment Sales and Other Receivables, Investment Purchases and Accrued
Expenses, and the Public Equity lines of the Statement of Fiduciary Net Position – Pension and Other
Postemployment Plans on pages 40 and 41. Changes in fair value during the fiscal year are reported in the Net
Appreciation/Depreciation in Fair Value of Investments line of the Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position –
Pension and Other Postemployment Plans on pages 42 and 43.
Table 16 presents the fair value amounts, the related net appreciation/(depreciation) in fair value amounts, and the
notional amounts of derivative instruments outstanding as of June 30, 2023.
A f orward  foreign currency exchange contract is a forward contract that is a commitment to purchase or sell a
foreign currency at a future date at a negotiated forward rate. The fair value of a foreign currency forward is
determined by the difference between the contract exchange rate and the closing exchange rate at the end of a
reporting period. Risks associated with such contracts include movement in the value of foreign currencies and the
ability of the counterparty to perform.
A futures contract represents a commitment to purchase or sell an underlying asset at a future date and at a
specified price. Futures contracts have standardized terms and are traded on exchanges. The counterparty credit
risk for futures is generally less than for privately negotiated forward contracts because the clearinghouse, which is
the issuer or counterparty to each exchange-traded future, settles daily the net change in the futures contract’s
value in cash with the broker. This results in the contract itself having no fair value at the end of any trading day.
A swap is an agreement that obligates two parties to exchange a series of cash flows or the net value of cash flows
at specified intervals based upon, or calculated by, reference to changes in specified prices or rates for a specified
amount of an underlying asset. Swaps are privately negotiated contracts with customized terms and are transacted
in over-the-counter markets. OPERF held various types of swaps including credit default, interest rate, and total
return swaps. The payment flows are usually netted against each other with the difference being paid by one party
or another. In addition, collateral may be pledged or received by OPERF in accordance with the terms of the
respective swap agreements to provide value and recourse to OPERF or its counterparties. Swaps are subject to
general market risk, liquidity risk, credit risk, interest rate risk, and the risk that the counterparty may fail to perform.
An opt ion is an instrument that gives one party the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying asset
from or to another party at a fixed price over a specified period. In writing an option, OPERF bears the market risk of
an unfavorable change in the price of the underlying investment of the written option. Exercise of an option written
by OPERF could result in OPERF selling or buying an asset at a price different from the current fair value. Options
may be subject to interest rate risk, general market risk, liquidity risk, credit risk, foreign currency risk, and, for non-
exchange traded options, the risk of the counterparty’s ability to perform.
Rights are the right, but not the obligation, to purchase newly issued equity shares, often in proportion to the number
of shares currently owned, in a specified company at a pre-established price on or within a predetermined date. A
warrant provides the holder the right, but not the obligation, to purchase securities from the issuing entity at a
specific price and within a certain period. In the OPERF portfolio, rights and warrants are often obtained and held
because of existing investments and are subject to general market risk and liquidity risk.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 73
TABLE 16
Derivative Instruments as of June 30, 2023
Net Appreciation/
(Depreciation) in
Invest
ment Derivatives Fair Value of Investments 1,3 Classification Fair Value Noti onal Value 2
Commodity Futures Long 231,167$                                 Pub lic Equity –$                  –$
Commodity Futures Short (1,744,848)                               Public Equity –                   –
Credit Default Swaps Bought (3,463,878)                               Public Equity (612,947)            47,980,000
Credit Default Swaps Written 7,469,364                                Public Equity 826,687             55,319,000
Fixed Income Futures Long (337,621,741)                           Public Equity –                   4,952,869,298
Fixed Income Futures Short 31,514,282                              Public Equity –                   (427,948,589)
Fixed Income Options Bought (1,366,800)                               Public Equity 10,433,616        228,130,144
Fixed Income Options Written 2,867,904                                Public Equity (965,685)            (75,324,699)
Foreign Currency Options Bought 792                                         Public Equity 20,462               5,686,934
Foreign Currency Options Written 2,307                                      Public Equity (130,966)            (3,367,934)
Foreign Exchange Forwards 62,150,050                              Receivables/Payables 117,281,168      13,710,720,876
Futures Options Bought (822,844)                                 Public Equity 99,102               246,000
Futures Options Written 2,096,256                                Public Equity (114,344)            (183,000)
Index Futures Long 16,739,954                              Public Equity –                   23,700
Index Futures Short (206,821,949)                           Public Equity –                   (12,839,265)
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps 144,892,967                            Public Equity 49,574,516        3,540,719,633
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps (124,932,898)                           Public Equity (48,365,874)       2,868,309,845
Rights 49,545                                    Public Equity 28,324               349,141
Total Return Swaps Bond 877,475                                   Public Equity –                   –
Total Return Swaps Equity (2,109,239)                               Public Equity –                   –
Warrants 22,548                                    Public Equity 279,844             47,453
Total (409,969,586)$                         128,353,903$     24,890,738,537$
1 Negative values (in brackets) refer to losses.
2 Notional may be a dollar amount or size of underlying for futures, rights, warrants, and options. Negative values refer to
short positions.
3 Excludes futures margin payments.
74 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
1. COUNTERPARTY CREDIT RISK
Table 17 presents a summary of counterparty credit ratings relating to derivative instruments in asset positions as of
June 30, 2023.
TABLE 17
Derivative Instruments Subject to Counterparty Credit Risk as of June 30, 2023
Percentage of S&P Fitch Moody's
Counterparty Name Net Exposure Rating Rating Rating
JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A. 10.03% A+ AA Aa2
HSBC Bank USA 9.67% A+ AA- Aa3
Royal Bank of Canada (U.K) 8.25% AA- AA- A1
UBS AG 6.45% A+ A+ Aa3
Goldman Sachs Bank USA 5.98% BBB+ A A2
Barclays Bank LCH 5.93% A+ A+ A1
Citibank N.A. 5.65% A+ A+ Aa3
Morgan Stanley Capital Services Inc. 5.20% A- A+ A1
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group 4.94% AA- A+ Aa3
State Street Bank London 3.55% A AA- A1
Standard Chartered Bank 3.47% A+ A+ A1
Société Générale 3.35% A A- A1
BNP Paribas SA 3.22% A+ A+ Aa3
Morgan Stanley and Co. International PLC 3.18% A- A+ A1
Morgan Stanley LCH 2.67% A- A+ A1
HSBC Bank PLC 2.54% A- A+ A3
Toronto Dominion Bank 2.23% AA- AA- A1
Morgan Stanley CME 1.92% A- A+ A1
Westpac Banking Corporation 1.84% AA- A+ Aa3
Credit Agricole CIB 1.71% A+ A+ Aa3
Bank of New York 1.64% A AA- A1
NatWest Markets PLC 1.54% A A+ A1
State Street Bank and Trust Company 1.39% AA- AA Aa3
JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A. London 1.24% A+ AA Aa2
Barclays Bank PLC Wholesale 0.92% A+ A+ A1
Royal Bank of Canada 0.38% AA- AA- A1
Bank of America, N.A. 0.31% A+ AA Aa1
The Bank of New York Mellon 0.25% AA- AA Aa2
Morgan Stanley ICE 0.23% A- A+ A1
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce 0.12% A+ AA- Aa2
Goldman Sachs International 0.10% A+ A+ A1
JP Morgan LCH 0.05% A- AA- A1
JP Morgan CME 0.03% A- AA- A1
Banco Santander Central Hispano 0.01% A+ A- A2
Deutsche Bank AG 0.01% A- A- A1
100.00%
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 75
2. INTEREST RATE RISK
As of June 30, 2023, OPERF is exposed to interest rate risk on its various swap arrangements and options. Table
18 presents a segmented time schedule of those instruments. Table 19 shows a schedule of derivative instruments
that were highly sensitive to interest rate changes.
TABLE 18
Derivative Instruments Subject to Interest Rate Risk as of June 30, 2023
Investment Type Fair Value Less Than 1 1 - 5 6 - 10 Mor e Than 10
Credit Default Swaps Bought (612,947)$           –$                (612,555)$          –$                 (392)$
Credit Default Swaps Written 826,687              –                  826,687             –                   –
Fixed Income Options Bought 10,433,616         216,659           10,216,957        –                   –
Fixed Income Options Written (965,685)             (817,620)          (148,065)           –                   –
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps 49,574,516         3,319,959        33,622,172        5,553,793          7,078,592
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps (48,365,874)        (3,617,026)       (25,810,423)       (8,181,279)         (10,757,146)
Total 10,890,313$       (898,028)$        18,094,773$      (2,627,486)$       (3,678,946)$
Investment Maturities (in years)
76 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
TABLE 19
Derivative Instruments Highly Sensitive to Interest Rate Changes as of June 30, 2023
Investment Type Reference Rate Fair Value Notional Value
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month US CPI, Pay Fixed 2.32950 53,078$          500,000$
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month US CPI, Pay Fixed 2.27400 1,045,731       9,300,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month US CPI, Pay Fixed 2.34500 125,550          1,200,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-month AUD BBSW, Pay Fixed 1.75000 649,764          3,727,640
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.52000 4,081,996       14,048,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR, Pay Fixed 0.00000 -                 11,564,604
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.44650 99,637            622,687
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.06000 -                 22,762,653
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.07700 -                 2,213,997
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.32000 97,907            5,100,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.43000 2,898              100,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.85000 2,947,877       104,500,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.75000 216,380          800,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.70000 -                 691,874
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.25000 -                 1,937,247
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.50000 -                 3,251,807
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.50000 209,782          1,624,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.45000 -                 2,421,559
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.60000 765,921          13,741,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR, Pay Fixed 7.49000 70,948            1,864,620
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.96478 957,173          23,600,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month CAD CDOR, Pay Fixed 3.25000 414,523          10,504,440
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.40000 11,092,310     500,000,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA, Pay Fixed 3.63900 (1,814)             455,356
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.27000 170,199          6,112,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR, Pay Fixed 5.48740 (5,293)             353,167
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR, Pay Fixed 6.54670 (41,593)           774,560
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.27000 585,784          21,036,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.06000 -                 484,312
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month CAD CDOR, Pay Fixed 3.25000 439,897          11,464,198
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month CAD CDOR, Pay Fixed 3.25000 206,229          4,685,434
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR, Pay Fixed 8.86000 (3,467)             382,135
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.63050 (49,754)           13,665,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.06050 54,072            2,081,500
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.05750 55,227            2,081,500
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.64000 (59,817)           13,665,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.32100 10,350            921,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.05000 1,356,982       32,293,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.18750 424,081          32,988,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.80000 3,579,083       442,463,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.20000 1,905,924       143,703,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.82600 162,139          19,633,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.85000 (30,810)           9,829,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.71450 (38,742)           3,750,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.68450 (49,042)           6,127,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.37200 (123,299)         3,859,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.48450 127,791          13,718,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.43750 215,531          21,737,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.53900 (188,278)         2,987,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.73000 122,534          20,136,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.47550 104,686          12,823,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.49800 570,655          62,345,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.39100 460,376          31,132,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.39900 84,507            5,969,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.42950 155,068          13,191,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE, Pay Fixed 8.47500 (697)               199,032
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.28900 542,049          23,751,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.31050 227,822          10,784,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.21500 284,191          9,912,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.44050 164,801          7,263,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.93500 344,762          6,969,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.35500 142,570          8,099,000
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 77
TABLE 19 continuing from the previous page
Investment Type Reference Rate Fair Value Notional Value
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable  0-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.15000 246,503          10,032,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.37150 140,276          8,610,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.70000 5,759,076       518,135,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.66550 594,823          84,062,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.14500 500,922          37,352,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.88400 116,102          19,172,500
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.16400 478,373          36,323,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.44650 209,283          21,237,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.07600 (31,546)           14,478,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.86500 71,747            11,056,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.02700 170                 12,239,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.90250 26,394            5,530,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.64000 150,739          10,168,847
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.38450 148,061          9,676,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.50400 48,930            7,963,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.33100 (141,123)         5,984,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.33950 (118,928)         4,690,500
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.94200 738,705          15,299,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.33900 (118,493)         4,690,500
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.52400 96,487            21,013,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.80800 (94,831)           5,351,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.47250 63,882            7,436,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.82600 111,225          22,536,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.00000 (122,040)         11,019,103
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.00000 136,734          2,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.09784 19,583            520,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.88000 115,726          1,960,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.10623 7,400              200,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.97000 285,680          6,765,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.06966 47,845            1,200,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.38000 187                 15,622
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month COP CPIBR, Pay Fixed 9.09770 (21,215)           387,442
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 2.75000 326,313          3,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.75000 (4,454)             1,096,947
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.25000 (30,711)           2,695,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR, Pay Fixed 2.50000 29,748            11,346,403
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.50000 145,216          25,311,208
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month CAD CORRA, Pay Fixed 3.25000 (5,247)             680,144
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.23400 6,559              242,000
Pay
Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.5000 11,204            1,651,419
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR, Pay Fixed 0.20000 (152,893)         70,294,392
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.15859 321,384          24,400,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month US CPI, Pay Fixed  2.50000 8,714              1,700,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.04500 18,705            441,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.50000 46,461            6,848,206
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI, Pay Fixed 12.64000 (45,210)           828,758
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 0.75000 2,842,775       13,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 1.25000 1,222,762       12,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month LIBOR, Pay Fixed 0.75000 143,735          13,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month LIBOR, Pay Fixed 1.25000 116,478          12,900,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.75000 19,698            1,731,119
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.75000 6,226              547,188
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.25300 236,262          9,281,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.54500 6,868              1,274,344
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month CZK PRIBOR, Pay Fixed 5.91857 (1,615)             498,055
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR, Pay Fixed 6.02100 (4,681)             931,700
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 6-Month NOK NIBOR, Pay Fixed 3.03300 2,596,581       52,347,728
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month COP CPIBR, Pay Fixed 8.76620 (27,394)           588,621
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 3-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 5.06260 11,065            3,000,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI, Pay Fixed 11.12000 (14,929)           637,447
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.75000 (5,563)             2,000,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month CLP CLICP, Pay Fixed 4.78500 3,933              433,198
78 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
TABLE 19 continuing from the previous page
Investment Type Reference Rate Fair Value Notional Value
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 0-Month CLP CLICP, Pay Fixed 4.86000 920                 291,541
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE, Pay Fixed 9.13600 3,558              1,392,379
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.76100 68,461            9,793,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.80650 46,051            9,295,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.00000 (2,775,269)      333,182,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.40000 453,684          111,154,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.60000 (361,695)         45,728,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.74950 107,704          14,383,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 4.77200 14,039            23,425,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.91700 (3,250)             19,640,000
Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Variable 12-Month SOFR, Pay Fixed 3.92550 (10,533)           16,231,000
Subtotal - Pay Fixed Interest Rate Swaps 49,574,516     3,540,719,633
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.45000, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE (561,936)         15,725,489
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.44000, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE (592,900)         16,370,951
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.00000, Pay Variable 3-Month CAD CDOR (780,868)         7,708,294
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month CAD CDOR (26,789)           151,143
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.25000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (3,410,134)      11,564,604
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.50000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (528,534)         1,091,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.50000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (2,393,194)      7,200,602
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (111,108)         22,762,653
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (114,523)         3,251,807
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (30,810)           2,213,997
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.45000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (364,240)         2,421,559
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month JPY TONAR (23,068)           4,427,993
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month JPY TONAR (198,242)         5,396,617
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.50000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (535,207)         11,300,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (970,353)         6,600,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.34250, Pay Variable 12-Month CHF SARON (326,447)         5,700,553
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.25000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (39,517)           1,937,247
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.70000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (58,392)           691,874
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.69500, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (493,940)         3,600,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.75000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (2,301,761)      68,000,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.80000, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR (30,954)           484,312
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (83,923)           4,036,701
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.75000, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (224,462)         5,697,646
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.77000, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (1,012,075)      33,131,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.00000, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (137,355)         8,209,512
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.96815, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (230,662)         10,000,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (333,470)         4,102,161
Recei
ve Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (88,573)           1,036,450
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.97000, Pay Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR (1,443)             296,336
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.78100, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (2,666,338)      55,600,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.50000, Pay Variable 6-month AUD BBSW 73,903            29,222,035
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.99500, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR (17,329)           851,929
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.25000, Pay Variable 6-month AUD BBSW (9,032)             1,331,300
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.10000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (55,193)           1,500,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.53500, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA 24                  53,125
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 8.95000, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE 5,804              305,530
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.88400, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (117,048)         19,172,500
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.20000, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (1,880,569)      143,703,000
Rec
eive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.80000, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (3,619,679)      442,463,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.50400, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (48,882)           7,963,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.52400, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (96,376)           21,013,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.16400, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (477,212)         36,323,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.47250, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (63,837)           7,436,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.14500, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (499,624)         37,352,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.50000, Pay Variable 3-Month CNY CNRR 29,962            4,763,183
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.45389, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (69,957)           3,900,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.86500, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (72,190)           11,056,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.66550, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (591,704)         84,062,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.90000, Pay Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR 43,183            409,062
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.02700, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (638)               12,239,000
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 79
TABLE 19 continuing from the previous page
Investment Type Reference Rate Fair Value Notional Value
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.89765, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 19,875            3,600,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.80800, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR 94,842            5,351,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.33100 Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR 145,445          5,984,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.90250, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (26,535)           5,530,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.82600, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (110,629)         22,536,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.07600, Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR 31,212            14,478,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 9.16000, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR (4,639)             200,781
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.33950, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 118,928          4,690,500
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.33900, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 118,493          4,690,500
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.44650, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (209,283)         21,237,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month Euro ESTR (677,951)         17,892,406
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.38450, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (148,061)         9,676,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.68000, Pay Variable 0-Month CNY CNRR 5,405              394,408
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.64000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (150,739)         10,168,847
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.39900, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (84,507)           5,969,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.94200, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (738,705)         15,299,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.70000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (5,759,076)      518,135,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.82600, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (161,252)         19,633,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.49800, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (570,655)         62,345,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.06050, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (55,796)           2,081,500
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.05750, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (56,951)           2,081,500
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.44050, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (164,801)         7,263,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.37200, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 120,018          3,859,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.63050, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 49,731            13,665,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.53900, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 186,060          2,987,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.47550, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (104,686)         12,823,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.31050, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (227,822)         10,784,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.28900, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (542,049)         23,751,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.68450, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 49,027            6,127,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.42950, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (155,069)         13,191,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.37150, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (140,276)         8,610,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.64000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 59,798            13,665,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.39100, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (460,376)         31,132,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.21500, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (284,192)         9,912,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.93500, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (344,762)         6,969,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.71450, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 38,740            3,750,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.35500, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (142,570)         8,099,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.32100, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (10,366)           921,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.73000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (123,626)         20,136,000
Rec
eive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.18750, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (425,105)         32,988,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.43750, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (216,501)         21,737,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.48450, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (128,385)         13,718,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (2,748)             24,798,438
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 6.84500, Pay Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR 19,409            281,569
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA (120,331)         8,370,296
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (209,358)         6,870,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.96500, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA (10,925)           455,356
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.22475, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (443,652)         14,900,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 12.50335, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 14,332            274,162
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.16312, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (129,310)         3,900,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.19687, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA 44,766            1,593,746
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.10000, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA (8,234)             455,356
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 8.71500, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR (19,020)           346,164
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 8.10850, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE (2,670)             254,220
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 12.68830, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 27,333            481,311
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month KRW KSDA (463,115)         40,219,573
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.75000, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (51,766)           8,393,307
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.08000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (46,217)           1,600,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.34000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (69,019)           2,400,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 12-Month GBP SONIA (480,130)         5,085,403
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.00000, Pay Variable 12-Month GBP SONIA (235,439)         6,611,024
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR 82,148            43,967,314
80 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
TABLE 19 continuing from the previous page
Investment Type Reference Rate Fair Value Notional Value
Recei
ve Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (14,591)           9,434,812
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month Euro EURIBOR (865,885)         95,462,530
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.75000, Pay Variable 12-Month GBP SONIA (538,134)         10,043,671
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.50000, Pay Variable 12-Month GBP SONIA (2,840,675)      44,878,681
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.29750, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (5,487)             250,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.17386, Pay Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR 1,809              235,297
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.30500, Pay Variable 6-Month PLN WIBOR 3,328              251,267
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.24800, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 85,631            9,522,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.10000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (66,884)           4,800,401
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.10000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (154,222)         10,910,003
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.00000, Pay Variable 6-Month SGD SORA (60,173)           4,233,938
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.28300, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (15,879)           689,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month THB THOR (7,430)             936,398
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.50000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (110,718)         8,700,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.50000, Pay Variable 3-Month LIBOR (91,787)           8,700,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (23,592)           1,745,601
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (23,714)           1,745,601
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.25000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (23,967)           1,745,601
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.76600, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR (32,459)           956,316
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.00000, Pay Variable 6-month AUD BBSW (38,053)           1,198,170
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 11.55000, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 14,316            588,050
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 11.35880 Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 15,562            746,534
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.17838 Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (397,309)         12,000,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.98000 Pay Variable 0-Month SOFR (2,360,997)      63,998,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 6-Month CAD CORRA (723,347)         32,873,607
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.25000, Pay Variable 6-Month CAD CORRA (102,216)         6,196,864
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.10000, Pay Variable 3-Month Euro EURIBOR (53,088)           3,382,101
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.26100, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (194,117)         6,569,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.40950, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (208,833)         11,415,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 1.61700, Pay Variable 3-Month SOFR (371,076)         3,000,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.25514 Pay Variable 3-Month LIBOR (10,809)           3,000,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.59750, Pay Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR (2,203)             685,592
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.56500, Pay Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR (2,214)             471,344
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.47100, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (11,830)           4,031,238
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.61500, Pay Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR (1,138)             471,344
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 2.75000, Pay Variable 0-Month CNY CNRR 149,518          9,017,008
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.09500 Pay Variable 6-Month CLP CLICP 3,906              497,276
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 0.68600, Pay Variable 12-Month JPY TONAR 55,205            4,358,806
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 8.45500, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR (1,847)             185,396
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 10.53850, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 7,801              738,898
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.50000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 18,894            3,800,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 10.36000, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 4,179              1,013,156
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 5.00800, Pay Variable 6-Month CLP CLICP 1,412              347,653
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.54500, Pay Variable 3-Month MYR KLIBOR (2,404)             428,495
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.42000, Pay Variable 3-Month NZD NZDBB (23,108)           3,345,070
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.85000, Pay Variable 6-Month CLP CLICP (1,474)             520,913
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 8.98000, Pay Variable 3-Month ZAR JIBAR 1,559              188,235
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 10.34500, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 2,886              410,137
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.97000, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE (287)               270,254
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 7.87240, Pay Variable 1-Month MXN TIIE (2,783)             370,252
R
eceive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.20000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 129,201          16,654,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.65000, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR (60,693)           20,136,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 10.31400, Pay Variable 0-Month BRL BRCDI 564                 314,489
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 4.79850, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 1,294              45,660,000
Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps Receive Fixed 3.56250, Pay Variable 12-Month SOFR 11,833            19,039,000
Subtotal - Receive Fixed Interest Rate Swaps (48,365,874)    2,868,309,845
Total Interest Rate Swaps 1,208,642$     6,409,029,478$
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 81
3. FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK
OPERF is exposed to foreign currency risk on its derivative instruments. Table 20 presents a summary of derivative
instruments subject to foreign currency risk as of June 30, 2023.
TABLE 20
Derivative Instruments Subject to Foreign Currency Risk as of June 30, 2023
Currency Name Net Receivables Net Payables
Options/Rights/
Warrants Swaps Total Exposure
Australian dollar (8,142,229)$       9,411,857$         –$                676,581$           1,946,209$
Bahraini dinar 116                   (8,621)                –                  –                   (8,505)
Brazilian real 19,883,255        (20,315,269)        –                  26,836              (405,178)
Canadian dollar 4,243,157          (8,484,590)         –                  (577,817)           (4,819,250)
Chilean peso 216,795             (3,197,718)         –                  8,696                (2,972,227)
Colombian peso 3,057,613          (2,858,361)         –                  (48,608)             150,644
Czech koruna 745,732             (2,457,812)         –                  (1,615)               (1,713,695)
Danish krone 1,715,345          1,213,055           –                  –                   2,928,400
Egyptian pound (300,965)           (40,776)              –                  –                   (341,741)
Euro1 5,196,614          (3,609, 708)         30,564             (8,594,807)         (6,977,337)
Hong Kong dollar (23,985)             137,490             –                  –                   113,505
Hungarian forint 98,939              (6,102,305)         –                  –                   (6,003,366)
Indian rupee 1,273,541          (465,618)            –                  –                   807,923
Indonesian rupiah 55,725              183,228             –                  –                   238,953
Japanese yen (28,144,505)       145,655,079       –                  (968,906)           116,541,668
Kazakhstan tenge 10,524              (17,148)              –                  –                   (6,624)
Kuwaiti dinar 4,960                (1,333)                –                  –                   3,627
Malaysian ringgit –                   357,837             –                  78,232              436,069
Mexican peso 15,308,438        (11,459,989)        –                  (1,151,912)         2,696,537
Moroccan dirham 178,705             (8,155)                –                  –                   170,550
New Israeli sheqel (1,948,900)         2,744,223           –                  –                   795,323
New Taiwan dollar (2,946,610)         4,939,326           –                  –                   1,992,716
New Zealand dollar (4,962,960)         4,995,621           –                  (463,111)           (430,450)
Norwegian krone (6,754,151)         4,088,741           –                  2,596,582          (68,828)
Peruvian nuevo sol 84,836              (124,620)            –                  –                   (39,784)
Philippine peso 268,790             (98,764)              –                  –                   170,026
Polish zloty 629,148             (3,804,939)         –                  14,719              (3,161,072)
Pound sterling 12,769,837        (16,983,263)        (5,286)              (4,094,378)         (8,313,090)
Romanian leu 4,518                6,572                 –                  –                   11,090
Russian ruble 802,869             3,620,247           –                  –                   4,423,116
Saudi riyal 2,098                (5,470)                –                  –                   (3,372)
Serbian dinar 53,780              –                    –                  –                   53,780
Singapore dollar (2,381,070)         2,245,953           1,056               (60,173)             (194,234)
South African fand (7,483,010)         3,630,507           –                  (6,254)               (3,858,757)
South Korean won (2,752,543)         3,000,388           –                  (559,630)           (311,785)
Swedish krona (6,281,045)         10,525,254         –                  -                    4,244,209
Swiss franc 5,751,823          (3,536,870)         –                  (326,447)           1,888,506
Thailand baht (80,396)             167,083             –                  (7,430)               79,257
Turkish lira (2,551,882)         218,377             –                  –                   (2, 333,505)
United Arab Emirates dirham (732)                  (357)                   –                  –                   (1,089)
Yuan renminbi (255,255)           3,282,632           –                  184,884             3,212,261
Yuan renminbi - offshore (7,847,650)         10,940,114         –                  –                   3,092,464
Total Subject to Foreign Currency Risk (10,500,730)       127,781,898       26,334             (13,274,558)       104,032,944
U.S. dollar –                   –                    9,624, 019        14,696,940        24,320,959
Total (10,500,730)$     127,781,898$     9,650,353$      1,422,382$        128,353,903$
1 Represents all of the positions with a Euro leg. It is not solely USD/Euro activity.
Currency Forward Contracts
82 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Note 5 - Capital Assets and Leases Used in Plan Operations
Capital construction of PERS’ headquarters in Tigard, Oregon, was completed May 31, 1997. The land, building,
and improvements are recorded at cost. The depreciation of the building and improvements is computed on the
straight-line method over the estimated useful life of 40 years.
Data-processing hardware, furniture, and equipment are recorded at cost. These are items that are not consumed in
the normal course of operations, have a useful life of more than one year, and are valued at $5,000 or more.
Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated useful lives. Useful lives range
from 3 to 10 years.
Data-processing software generated internally as part of the Oregon Retirement Information Online Network
(ORION) Project is recorded at cost. The useful life is amortized using the straight-line method over 20 years. Refer
to Table 21.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 83
TABLE 21
Schedule of Changes in Capital Assets for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Beginning
of Year Increases Decreases End of Year
Capital assets, not being
depreciated or amortized:
Land 944,463$            –$               –$                     944,463$
944,463              –                 –                       944,463
Capital assets, being depreciated
or amortized:
Furniture and Equipment 1,444,733           10,721            (73,921)                 1,381,533
Data Processing Software 40,709,577         115,361          –                       40,824,937
Data Processing Hardware 2,793,167           89,506            (1,377,489)            1,505,184
Building and Building Improvements 10,200,872         –                 (257,543)               9,943,328
Right-To-Use-Asset - Building Lease 644,023              –                 –                       644,023
Right-To-Use-Asset - Equipment Lease 167,306              –                 –                       167,306
Total capital assets being
depreciated or amortized 55,959,678         215,589          (1,708,954)            54,466,312
Less accumulated depreciation
or amortization for:
Furniture and Equipment (1,330,073)          (51,740)           63,200                  (1,318,612)
Data Processing Software (26,694,847)        (1,909,667)      –                       (28,604,514)
Data Processing Hardware (1,944,996)          (424,949)         1,377,489              (992,456)
Building and Building Improvements (5,521,594)          (383,357)         257,543                (5,647,407)
Right-To-Use-Asset - Building Lease (295,177)             (295,177)         –                       (590,354)
Right-To-Use-Asset - Equipment Lease (87,648)               (41,827)           –                       (129,475)
Total accumulated depreciation
or amortization (35,874,335)        (3,106,715)      1,698,232              (37,282,818)
Total capital assets, being
depreciated or amortized, net 20,085,344         (2,891,127)      (10,721)                 17,183,495
Capital assets, net 21,029,807$       (2,891,127)$     (10,721)$               18,127,958$
Depreciation and Amortization expense
Amount
Defined Benefit Pension Plan $3,084,483
Individual Account Program 22,232
Total Depreciation and Amortization expense 3,106,715$
Leases Payable
The lease liability activity for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023, is as follows:
June 30, 2022 Addition Reduction June 30, 2023
Building Lease 402,038$        -$                   (402,038)$       -$
Equipment Lease 86,173            -$                   (49,793)           36,380
Totals 488,211$        -$                   (451,831)$       36,380$
The principal and interest payments on the lease liability as of June 30, 2023, are as follows:
Year Principal Interest Total
2024 22,834$              754$               23,588$
2025 8,033                  346                 8,379
2026 5,513                  73                   5,586
36,380$              1,173$            37,553$
Total capital assets, not being
depreciated or amortized
Equipment Leases
84 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Note 6 - Reserves and Designations
In accordance with the following plan requirements, various funds have been established to account for reserves or
designations held for future and current payments.
A. CHAPTER 238 DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN
Table 22 details the amounts comprising the total Net Position Restricted for Pension Benefits.
i. Member Reserve
The Member Reserve represents member contributions made through December 31, 2003, plus earnings
allocations, less refunds and amounts transferred to reserves for retirements and disabilities.
ii. Employer Contribution Designation
The Employer Contribution Designation represents employer contributions and earnings allocations less amounts
transferred to reserves for retirements and disabilities. Employer side accounts consist of lump-sum payments
deposited into the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund, less amounts amortized as credits to employer
contributions, plus investment earnings allocated in accordance with OAR 459-007-0530. Final earnings crediting is
done annually on a calendar year basis. PERS estimates that the approximate value of employer side accounts was
$5,814.8 million as of June 30, 2023. Side account balances are included in the Employer Contribution Designation
reserve.
iii. Benefit Reserve
The Benefit Reserve is the amount set aside to pay future benefits. It includes funds transferred from the individual
member and employer accounts plus earnings allocations less amounts paid for retirements and disability benefits.
iv. Tier One Rate Guarantee Reserve
The Tier One Rate Guarantee Reserve may be credited with investment earnings in excess of the required Tier One
assumed earnings rate guarantee. ORS 238.255(1) requires regular accounts for Tier One members to be credited
at the assumed rate of return on investments adopted by the PERS Board for use in actuarial valuations.
The regular account for Tier One members and alternate payees of those members cannot be credited with
earnings in excess of the assumed interest rate until  the reserve is fully funded with amounts determined by the
Board, after consultation with the actuary employed by the Board, that are necessary to ensure a zero balance in
the reserve when all Tier One members and alternate payees of those members have retired and the reserve has
been fully funded as described in each of the three immediately preceding calendar years.
TABLE 22
Reserves and Designations as of June 30, 2023
Defined Benefit
Pension Plan
Chapter 238 Defined Benefit Plan and Employee Benefit Plan
Member Reserve $ 3,507,305,974
Employer Contribution Designation 48,313,920,119
Benefit Reserve 16,309,196,239
Tier One Rate Guarantee Reserve 736,511,400
Contingency Reserve 47,481,112
Employer Contingency Reserve 2,500,000
Unallocated Earnings Designation 2,293,959,950
OPSRP Defined Benefit Program 11,796,780,025
Employee Pension Stability Account Reserves 479,963,247
Net Position Restricted for Pension Benefits $ 83,487,618,066
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 85
v. Contingency Reserve
The Contingency Reserve is maintained and used by the PERS Board to prevent any deficit of moneys available for
the payment of retirement allowances caused by interest fluctuations, changes in mortality rates, or other
unforeseen contingencies.
vi. Employer Contingency Reserve
The PERS Board established the Employer Contingency Reserve to prevent any deficit in the fund caused by
insolvency of an employer. Earnings on employer contributions fund this reserve.
vii. Unallocated Earnings Designation
The Unallocated Earnings Designation represents January through June investment earnings or losses less
administrative expenses, which are credited on a calendar year basis. Crediting takes place in March or April of the
year after employer annual reports have been reconciled and contributions have been posted to individual member
and employer accounts.
viii. OPSRP Defined Benefit Program
OPSRP Defined Benefit Program reserve represents the program’s accumulation of employer contributions and
investment earnings less benefits and administrative expenses.
ix. Employee Pension Stability Account Reserves
EPSA Reserves represent the program’s accumulation of redirected member IAP contributions and investment
earnings less benefits and administrative expenses, amounts withdrawn by eligible members prior to retirement,
amounts transferred to the Employer Contribution Designation for Tier One and Tier Two member retirements, and
amounts transferred to the OPSRP Defined Benefit program for OPSRP member retirements.
B. OTHER POSTEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS PLANS
i. Retirement Health Insurance Account (RHIA)
The RHIA plan fiduciary net position balance represents the program’s accumulation of employer contributions and
investment earnings, less premium subsidies and administrative expenses. As of June 30, 2023, the balance of this
account was $726.6 million. The Internal Revenue Code limits employer contributions to a 401(h) account to a
maximum of 25% of the employer’s normal cost contributions to the pension plan.
ii. Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA)
The RHIPA plan fiduciary net position balance represents the program’s accumulation of employer contributions and
investment earnings, less premium subsidies and administrative expenses. As of June 30, 2023, the balance of this
account was $91.4 million. The Internal Revenue Code limits employer contributions to a 401(h) account to a
maximum of 25% of the employer’s normal cost contributions to the pension plan.
C. OTHER PLANS
i. Individual Account Program (IAP)
The IAP fiduciary net position balance represents member contributions and investment earnings less benefits paid
and administrative expenses. As of June 30, 2023, the balance of this account was $12,974.9 million. Member
contributions are described in Note 2.D.1. (page 58). The Oregon Legislature created the IAP in 2003 to provide an
individual account-based defined contribution retirement benefit for new workers hired on or after August 29, 2003,
and for Tier One/Tier Two members active on and after January 1, 2004.
86 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
ii. Deferred Compensation Plan
The Deferred Compensation plan fiduciary net position balance represents the program’s accumulation of plan
member contributions and investment earnings less benefits paid and administrative expenses. As of June 30, 2023,
the balance of this account was $2,810.9 million. The Internal Revenue Code (IRC) limits plan member contributions
to an IRC 457 account to a maximum of $20,500 (calendar year 2022), with optional catch-up provisions available to
members over age 50.
D. ENTERPRISE FUND
i. Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account (SRHIA)
The SRHIA net position balance represents the program’s accumulation of retiree insurance premiums, reinsurance
reimbursements, and interest earnings less insurance claims and administrative expenses. As of June 30, 2023, the
balance of this account was $91.5 million.
Note 7 - Litigation
PERS is a defendant in various lawsuits. Although the outcomes of these lawsuits are not presently determinable, in
the opinion of the System's legal counsel, the resolution of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on
the financial condition of the System.
Note 8 - Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account (SRHIA)
A. BAS IS  FOR ESTIMATED LIABILITIES
The SRHIA establishes claim liabilities based on estimates of the ultimate costs of claims (including future claim
adjustment expenses) that have been reported but not settled and of claims that have been incurred but not
reported (IBNR). Table 23 shows the changes in the aggregated estimated claims liabilities for the fiscal years that
ended on June 30 in 2023 and 2022.
The estimated claims liability was calculated by Butler Partners & Associates, PERS’ health insurance consultant,
on June 30, 2023, using a variety of mathematical and statistical techniques and adjusted for actual experience to
produce current estimates that reflect recent settlements, claim frequency, and other economic and social factors.
Adjustments to claims liabilities are charged or credited to expense in the periods in which they are made. The
estimated claims liability of $876,000 is carried at its face amount, and no interest discount is assumed. The IBNR
represents an estimate for claims that have been incurred prior to June 30, 2023, but have not been reported to the
SRHIA.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 87
Note 9 - Employers’ Net Pension Liability
A. ACTUARIAL COST METHOD AND ASSUMPTIONS
The components of the net pension liability of the Defined Benefit Pension Plan are shown in Table 24. The actuarial
valuation calculations are based on the benefits provided under the terms of the plan in effect at the time of each
valuation and on the pattern of cost-sharing between the employer and plan members. The December 31, 2021,
system-wide actuarial valuation was used to develop the GASB 67 financial reporting results for the Defined Benefit
Pension Plan as of June 30, 2023, using standard roll-forward procedures. Key actuarial methods and assumptions
used to measure the total pension liability are illustrated in Table 25.
B. DISCOUNT RATE
The discount rate used to measure the total pension liability was 6.9% for the Defined Benefit Pension Plan. The
projection of cash flows used to determine the discount rate assumed that contributions from plan members and
contributing employers are made at the contractually required rates, as actuarially determined. Based on those
assumptions, the pension plan’s fiduciary net position was projected to be available to make all projected future
benefit payments of current plan members. Therefore, the long-term expected rate of return on pension plan
investments for the Defined Benefit Pension Plan was applied to all periods of projected benefit payments to
determine the total pension liability.
C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Table 26 presents the net pension liability calculated using the discount rate of 6.9% as well as what the net pension
liability would be if it were calculated using a discount rate that is 1% lower (5.9%) or 1% higher (7.9%) than the
current rate. The results of actuarial valuations used for rate setting and the related Schedules of Funding Progress
are in the Actuarial Section beginning on page 129.
TABLE 23
Changes in the Aggregated Estimated Claims Liabilities of SRHIA
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30,
2023 2022
Total Estimated Claims at Beginning of Fiscal Year 848,000$    830,000$
Insured Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses
Provision for Insured Events
of Current Fiscal Year 27,342,050 30,271,731
Increase in Provision for
Insured Events of Prior Years 804,117 781,678
Total Incurred Claims and
Claim Adjustment Expenses 28,146,167 31,053,409
Payments
Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses
Attributable to Insured Events of
Current Fiscal Year 27,314,050 30,253,731
Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses
Attributable to Insured Events of
Prior Fiscal Year 804,117 781,678
Total Payments 28,118,167 31,035,409
Total Estimated Claims at End of Fiscal Year 876,000$    848,000$
88 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
D. LONG-TERM EXPECTED RATE OF RETURN
To develop an analytical basis for the selection of the long-term expected rate of return assumption, in January 2023
the PERS Board reviewed long-term assumptions developed by both Milliman’s Capital Market Assumptions Team
and the Oregon Investment Council’s (OIC) investment advisors. Table 31 shows Milliman’s assumptions for each of
the asset classes in which the plan was invested at that time based on the OIC long-term target asset allocation.
The OIC’s description of each asset class was used to map the target allocation to the asset classes shown in Table
31. Each asset class assumption is based on a consistent set of underlying assumptions and includes adjustment
for the inflation assumption. These assumptions are not based on historical returns but instead are based on a
forward-looking capital market economic model.
E. DEPLETION DATE PROJECTION
GASB 67 generally requires that a blended discount rate be used to measure the total pension liability (the actuarial
accrued liability calculated using the Individual Entry Age Normal Cost method). The long-term expected return on
plan investments may be used to discount liabilities to the extent that the plan’s fiduciary net position (fair value of
investment assets, all others at cost) is projected to cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. A 20-year
high-quality (AA/Aa or higher) municipal bond rate must be used for periods when the fiduciary net position is not
projected to cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. Determining the discount rate under GASB 67 will
often require that the actuary perform complex projections of future benefit payments and asset values. GASB 67
(paragraph 43) does allow for alternative evaluations of projected solvency if such evaluation can reliably be made.
GASB does not recommend a specific method for making an alternative evaluation of sufficiency; it is left to
professional judgment.
The following circumstances justify an alternative evaluation of sufficiency for Oregon PERS:
• PERS has a formal written policy to calculate an Actuarially Determined Contribution (ADC), which is
articulated in the actuarial valuation report.
• The ADC is based on a closed, layered amortization period, which means that payment of the full ADC each
year will bring the plan to a 100% funded position by the end of the amortization period if future experience
follows assumption.
• GASB 67 specifies that the projections regarding future solvency assume that plan assets earn the assumed
rate of return and there are no future changes in the plan provisions or actuarial methods and assumptions.
This means that the projections would not reflect any adverse future experience that might impact the plan’s
funded position.
Based on these circumstances, it is our third-party actuary’s opinion that the detailed depletion date projections
outlined in GASB 67 would clearly indicate that the fiduciary net position is always projected to be sufficient to cover
benefit payments and administrative expenses.
TABLE 24
Net Pension Liability (in Millions)
As of June 30,
2023
Total Pension Liability $ 102,218.3
Plan Fiduciary Net Position 83,487.6
Employers' Net Pension Liability $ 18,730.7
Plan net position as a percentage of
total pension liability 81.7 %
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 89
Note 10 - Employers’ Net OPEB (Asset)
A. ACTUARIAL COST METHOD AND ASSUMPTIONS
The components of the net OPEB (asset) for the OPEB plans are shown in Table 27. The actuarial valuation
calculations are based on the benefits provided under the terms of the plan in effect at the time of each valuation
and on the pattern of sharing of costs between the employer and plan members as of the December 31, 2021,
valuation rolled forward to June 30, 2023. Key actuarial methods and assumptions used to measure the total OPEB
liability are illustrated in Table 28.
TABLE 26
Sensitivity of Net Pension Liability to Changes in the Discount Rate (in Millions)
As of June 30, 2023
Current
1% Decrease Discount 1% Increase
Employers' Net Pension Liability (5.90 %) Rate (6.90%) (7.90 %)
Defined Benefit Pension Plan 30,939.6$          18,730.7$          8,513.1$
TABLE 25
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Valuation date
Measurement date
Experience Study
Actuarial assumptions:
Actuarial cost method
Inflation rate
Long-term expected rate of return
Discount rate
Projected salary increases
Cost-of-living adjustments (COLA)
Mortality
Pension
December 31, 2021
June 30, 2023
2020, published July 20, 2021
Entry Age Normal
2.40 percent
6.90 percent
6.90 percent
3.40 percent
Blend of 2.00% COLA and graded COLA (1 .25%/0 .15%)
in accordance with Moro decision; blend based on service.
Healthy retirees and beneficiaries:
Pub-2010 Healthy Retiree, sex distinct, generational with
Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Active members:
Pub-2010 Employee, sex distinct, generational w ith
Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Disabled retirees:
Pub-2010 Disabled Retiree, sex distinct, generational with
Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
90 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
B. DISCOUNT RATE
The discount rate used to measure the total OPEB liability was 6.9% for the OPEB plans. The projection of cash
flows used to determine the discount rate assumed that contributions from contributing employers are made at the
contractually required rates, as actuarially determined. Based on those assumptions, the OPEB plans’ fiduciary net
position was projected to be available to make all projected future benefit payments of current plan members.
Therefore, the long-term expected rate of return on OPEB plan investments for the OPEB plans was applied to all
periods of projected benefit payments to determine the total OPEB liability.
C. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Table 29 presents the net OPEB (asset) calculated using the discount rate of 6.9%, as well as what the net OPEB
(asset) would be if it were calculated using a discount rate that is 1% lower (5.9%) or 1% higher (7.9%) than the
current rate. The results of actuarial valuations used for rate setting and the related Schedules of Funding Progress
may be found in the Actuarial Section on page 129.
Table 30 presents the net OPEB (asset) calculated using the current healthcare cost trend rates. It also presents
what the net OPEB (asset) would be if it were calculated using healthcare.
D. LONG-TERM EXPECTED RATE OF RETURN
To develop an analytical basis for the selection of the long-term expected rate of return assumption, in January 2023
the PERS Board reviewed long-term assumptions developed by both Milliman’s Capital Market Assumptions Team
and the Oregon Investment Council’s (OIC) investment advisors. Table 31 shows Milliman’s assumptions for each of
the asset classes in which the plans were invested at that time based on the OIC long-term target asset allocation.
The OIC’s description of each asset class was used to map the target allocation to the asset classes shown in Table
31. Each asset class assumption is based on a consistent set of underlying assumptions and includes adjustment
for the inflation assumption. These assumptions are not based on historical returns but instead are based on a
forward-looking capital market economic model.
E. DEPLETION DATE PROJECTION
GASB 74 generally requires that a blended discount rate be used to measure the total OPEB liability (the actuarial
accrued liability calculated using the Individual Entry Age Normal Cost Method). The long-term expected return on
plan investments may be used to discount liabilities to the extent that the plan’s fiduciary net position (fair value of
investment assets) is projected to cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. A 20-year high-quality
(AA/Aa or higher) municipal bond rate must be used for periods when the fiduciary net position is not projected to
cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. Determining the discount rate under GASB 74 will often
require that the actuary perform complex projections of future benefit payments and asset values. GASB 74
(paragraph 51) does allow for alternative evaluations of projected solvency if such evaluation can reliably be made.
GASB does not recommend a specific method for making an alternative evaluation of sufficiency; it is left to
professional judgment.
The f ollowing  circumstances justify an alternative evaluation of sufficiency for Oregon PERS:
• PERS has a formal written policy to calculate an Actuarially Determined Contribution (ADC), which is
articulated in the actuarial valuation report.
• The ADC is based on a closed, layered amortization period, which means that payment of the full ADC each
year will bring the plan to a 100% funded position by the end of the amortization period if future experience
follows assumption.
• GASB 74 specifies that the projections regarding future solvency assume that plan assets earn the assumed
rate of return and there are no future changes in the plan provisions or actuarial methods and assumptions.
This means that the projections would not reflect any adverse future experience that might impact the plan’s
funded position.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 91
Based on these circumstances, it is our third-party actuary’s opinion that the detailed depletion date projections
outlined in GASB 74 would clearly indicate that the Fiduciary Net Position is always projected to be sufficient to
cover benefit payments and administrative expenses.
TABLE 27
Net OPEB - RHIA (Asset) (in Millions) Net OPEB - RHIPA (Asset) (in Millions)
As of June 30, 2023 As of June 30, 2023
Total OPEB - RHIA Liability $ 360.4 Total OPEB - RHIPA Liability $ 47.3
Plan Fiduciary Net Position 726.6 Plan Fiduciary Net Position 91.4
Employers' Net OPEB - RHIA (Asset) $ (366.2) Employer's Net OPEB - RHIPA (Asset) $ (44.1)
Plan net position as a percentage of Plan net position as a percentage of
Total OPEB - RHIA Liability 201.6 %   Total OPEB - RHIPA Liability 193.2 %
2023 2023
TABLE 28
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
RHIA RHIPA
Valuation date December 31, 2021 December 31, 2021
Measurement date June 30, 2023 June 30, 2023
Experience Study 2020, published July 20, 2021 2020, published July 20, 2021
Actuarial assumptions:
Actuarial cost method Entry Age Normal Entry Age Normal
Inflation rate 2.40 percent 2.40 percent
Long-term expected rate of return 6.90 percent 6.90 percent
Discount rate 6.90 percent 6.90 percent
Projected salary increases 3.40 percent 3.40 percent
Retiree healthcare participation Healthy retirees: 27.5% 8-14 Years of Service: 10.0%
Disabled retirees: 15.0 % 15-19 Years of Service: 11.0%
20-24 Years of Service 14.0%
25-29 Years of Service: 22.0%
30+ Years of Service: 27.0%
Healthcare cost trend rate Not applicable Applied at beginning of plan year, starting with 5.9%
for 2021, decreasing to 4.7% for 2028, increasing to
4.8% for 2037, increasing to 4.9% for 2046, and decreasing
to an ultimate rate of 3.9% for 2074 and beyond.
Mortality Healthy retirees and beneficiaries: Healthy retirees and beneficiaries:
Pub-2010 Healthy Retiree, sex distinct, generational Pub-2010 Healthy Retiree, sex distinct, generational
with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation. adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Active members: Active members:
Pub-2010 Employee, sex distinct, generational with Pub-2010 Employee, sex distinct, generational
Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation. adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Disabled retirees: Disabled retirees:
Pub-2010 Disabled Retiree, sex distinct, generational Pub-2010 Disabled Retiree, sex distinct, generational
with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation. adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
92 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
TABLE 29
Sensitivity of Net OPEB (Asset) to Changes in the Discount Rate (in Millions)
As of June 30, 2023
Current
1% Decrease Discount 1% Increase
Employers' Net OPEB (Asset) (5.90 %) Rate (6.90%) (7.90 %)
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIA (332.8)$         (366.2)$         (394.8)$
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIPA (41.4)$           (44.1)$           (46.6)$
TABLE 30
Sensitivity of Net OPEB (Asset) to Changes in the Healthcare Cost Trend Rate (in Millions)
As of June 30, 2023
Employers' Net OPEB (Asset) 1% Decrease Current Trend Rate 1% Increase
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIA (366.2)$           (366.2)$                  (366.2)$
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIPA (47.7)               (44.1)                     (40.0)
TABLE 31
Long-Term Expected Rate of Return 1
Asset Class Return 2
Global Equity 27.50 % 8.57 % 7.07 % 17.99 %
Private Equity 25.50 12.89 8.83 30.00
Core Fixed Income 25.00 4.59 4.50 4.22
Real Estate 12.25 6.90 5.83 15.13
Master Limited Partnerships 0.75 9.41 6.02 27.04
Infrastructure 1.50 7.88 6.51 17.11
Hedge Fund of Funds - Multistrategy 1.25 6.81 6.27 9.04
Hedge Fund Equity - Hedge 0.63 7.39 6.48 12.04
Hedge Fund - Macro 5.62 5.44 4.83 7.49
Assumed Inflation - Mean 2.35 % 1.41 %
1 Based on the OIC Statement of Investment Objectives and Policy Framework for the Oregon Public
Employees Retirement Fund, including revisions adopted at the OIC meeting on January 25, 2023.
2 The arithmetic mean is a component that goes into calculating the geometric mean. Expected rates
of return are presented using the geometric mean, which the Board uses in setting the discount rate.
Target Arithmetic Geometric Standard
Allocation Mean Deviation
Annual
20-Year
Annual Annuallized
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 93
Note 11– Effect of Future Pronouncements
The future GASB pronouncements that may have an impact to PERS financial statements are as follows:
• GASB Statement No. 100, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections – an Amendment of GASB Statement
No. 62, was issued in June 2022. This statement prescribes the accounting and financial reporting for (1)
each type of accounting change and (2) error corrections. This statement requires that (a) changes in
accounting principles and error corrections be reported retroactively by restating prior periods, (b) changes
to or within the financial reporting entity be reported by adjusting beginning balances of the current period,
and (c) changes in accounting estimates be reported prospectively by recognizing the change in the current
period. The requirements of this statement are effective with fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2023.
PERS management is currently evaluating the impacts of this statement.
• GASB Statement No. 101, Compensated Absences, was issued in June 2022. This statement requires that
liabilities for compensated absences be recognized for (1) leave that has not been used and (2) leave that
has been used but not yet paid in cash or settled through noncash means. A liability should be recognized
for leave that has not been used if (a) the leave is attributable to services already rendered, (b) the leave
accumulates, and (c) the leave is more likely than not to be used for time off or otherwise paid in cash or
settled through noncash means. The requirements of this statement are effective with fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2023. PERS management is currently evaluating the impacts of this statement.
94 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 95
Required Supplementary Information
96 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability and Related Ratios  (Unaudited)
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30,
(amounts in millions)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019
Total Pension Liability 1
Service Cost $ 1,485.2       $ 1,387.7       $ 1,263.5       $ 1,187.2       $ 1,146.4
Interest on Total Pension Liability 6,694.3       6,505.6       6,349.3       6,162.9       5,952.1
Effect of Plan Changes 2 –             –             148.5          –             (50.6)
Changes in Benefit Terms –             –             –             –             –
Changes in Assumptions –             490.3          3,041.9       (50.5)           –
Differences Between Expected and Actual Experience 636.0          (116.7)         600.9          406.7          804.2
Benefit Payments, including refunds of contributions (5,678.8)      (5,483.1)      (5,249.0)      (5,064.8)      (4,827.0)
Net Change in Total Pension Liability 3,136.7       2,783.8       6,155.1       2,641.5       3,025.1
Total Pension Liability - Beginning 99,081.6     96,297.8     90,142.7     87,501.2     84,476.1
Total Pension Liability - Ending $ 102,218.3   $ 99,081.6     $ 96,297.8     $ 90,142.7     $ 87,501.2
Plan Fiduciary Net Position
Employer Contributions $ 2,392.9       $ 4,030.2       $ 2,161.5       $ 2,299.0       $ 1,720.2
Member Contributions 167.5          160.1          160.3          10.2            11.4
Net Investment and Other Income 2,904.1       789.8          18,998.4     923.3          4,010.0
Benefit Payments (5,668.6)      (5,468.2)      (5,237.2)      (5,064.8)      (4,815.1)
Refunds of Contributions (10.2)           (14.9)           (11.9)           –             (11.9)
Administrative Expense (67.7)           (58.7)           (59.1)           (52.1)           (38.4)
Net Change in Plan Fiduciary Net Position (282.0)         (561.7)         16,012.0     (1,884.4)      876.2
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Beginning 83,769.6     84,331.3     68,319.3     70,203.7     69,327.5
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Ending $ 83,487.6     $ 83,769.6     $ 84,331.3     $ 68,319.3     $ 70,203.7
Net Pension Liability $ 18,730.7     $ 15,312.0     $ 11,966.5     $ 21,823.4     $ 17,297.5
Plan Fiduciary Net Position as a Percentage
of the Total Pension Liability 81.7            % 84.5            % 87.6            % 75.8            % 80.2            %
Covered Payroll $ 14,455.0     $ 12,942.6     $ 12,235.5     $ 11,574.8     $ 10,716.7
Net Pension Liability as
a Percentage of Covered Payroll 129.58        % 118.31        % 97.8            % 188.5          % 161.4          %
1 See Table 25 for Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
2 Senate Bill 1049, signed into law in June 2019, introduced a limit on the amount of annual salary included for the calculation of benefits. Beginning in 2020, annual salary in excess of $195,000
(as indexed in future years) will be excluded when determining member benefits. As a result, future benefits for certain active members are now projected to be lower than prior to the legislation.
Senate Bill 111, enacted in June 2021,provides an increased pre-retirement death benefit for members who die on or after their earlyretirement age.
Benefit Terms:   The 2013 Oregon Legislature made a series of changes to PERS that lowered projected future benefit payments from the System. These changes included reductions to future Cost
of Living Adjustments (COLA) made through Senate Bills 822 and 861. Senate Bill 822 also required the contribution rates scheduled to be in effect from July 2013 to June 2015 to be reduced. The
Oregon Supreme Court decision in Moro v. State of Oregon, issued on April 30, 2015, reversed a significant portion of the reductions the 2013 Oregon Legislature made to future System Cost of Living
Adjustments (COLA) through Senate Bills 822 and 861. This reversal increased the total pension liability as of June 30, 2015 compared to June 30, 2014 total pension liability.
included the lowering of the long-term expected rate of return to 7.50 percent and lowering of the assumed inflation to 2.50 percent.  For June 30, 2018, the long-term expected rate of return was
lowered to 7.20 percent. For June 30, 2021, the long-term expected rate of return was lowered to 6.90 percent, and the inflation rate was lowered from 2.5 to 2.4 percent.  In addition, the healthy mortality
assumption was changed to reflect an updated mortality improvement scale for all groups, and assumptions were updated for merit increases, unused sick leave, and vacation pay were updated.
Assumptions: The PERS Board adopted assumption changes that were used to measure the June 30, 2016 total pension liability and June 30, 2018 total pension liability. For June 30, 2016, the changes
Changes in Benefit Terms and Assumptions:
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Investment Returns  (Unaudited)
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014
Annual Money-Weighted Rate of Return
Net of Investment Expense 3.0% 6.2% 26.2% 0.5% 6.4% 9.7% 11.8% 1.6% 3.7% 17.2%I I I I I I I I I I I
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 97
Continued from the first page.
2018 2017 2016 2015 2014
$ 1,108.2 $ 1,105.5 $ 1,016.8 $ 960.9 $ 1,020.3
5,858.2 5 ,662.2 5 ,355.3 4,779.5 4,819.4
5,353.5 (2,423.6)
2,240.3 3,946.4
74.3 351.8 317.3 380.0
(4 656.6} (4 362.2} (4 206.5} (3 943.6} (3 863.4}
4,624.4 2,757.3 6,429.3 7,530.3 (447.3)
79,851.7 77,094.4 70,665.1 63,134.8 63,582.1
$ 84 476.1 $ 79 851.7 $ 77 094.4 $ 70 665.1 $ 63 134.8
$ 1,390.1 $ 1,022.2 $ 977.3 $ 1,123.3 $ 915.2
12.6 13.1 142 13.8 15.3
6,247.5 7,660.0 413.9 2 ,364.5 9,886.6
(4,642.7) ( 4,346.2) ( 4,193.3) ( 3,9272) ( 3,837.8)
(13.9) (16.0) (13.1) (16.5) (25.6)
{37.8) {43.5) {40.5) {35.7) {312)
2,955.8 4,289.6 (2,841.5) ( 477.8) 6,922.5
66,371.7 62,082.1 64,923.6 65,401.4 58,478.9
i 69 327.5 i 66 371.7 i 62 082.1 i 64 923.6 i 65 401.4
$ 15,148.6 $ 13,480.0 $ 15,012.3 $ 5,741.5 $ (2,266.6)
82.1 % 83.1 % 80.5 % 91.9 % 103.6 %
$ 10,044.0 $ 10,037.5 $ 9,428.4 $ 9,0002 $ 8,701.7
150.8 % 134.3 % 159.2 % 63.8 % (26.0) %
98 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Defined Benefit Pension Plan Employer Contributions3   (Unaudited)
Last 10 Fiscal Years
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019
Actuarially determined contributions1
2,226,974$     2,117,323$    2,058,483$    1,981,943$     1,410,966$
Contributions in relation to the actuarially
determined contributions2 2,226,974       2,117,323      2,058,483      1,981, 943      1,410,966
Contribution deficiency (excess) –$              –$              –$              –$              –$
Covered payroll 14,455,011$   12,942,642$  12,235,510$  11,574,796$   10,716,707$
Contributions as a percentage of
covered payroll 15.41% 16.36% 16.82% 17.12% 13.17%
Notes:
1 The actuarially determined contributions on this Schedule of Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Contributions have been adjusted to remove contribution requirements related to employer-
specific liabilities.
2 Employer contributions on the Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position include interest
related to employer-specific liabilities and employers' optional supplemental contributions.
3 For Actuarial Assumptions and Methods, see table below.
Actuarial Valuation:
Effective:
Actuarial cost method:
Amortization method:
Asset valuation method:
Remaining amortization periods:
Actuarial assumptions:
Inf
lation rate
Projected salary increases
Investment rate of return
3.40 percent
6.90 percent
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of
Fair value
20 years
2.40 percent
payroll
7.20 percent 7.50 percent
Fair value
Entry Age Normal
Actuarial Assumptions and Methods Used to Set the Actuarially Determined Contributions
December 31, 2017
July 2019 - June 2021
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of
December 31, 2019
July 2021 - June 2023
3.50 percent
2.50 percent
December 31, 2015
20 years 20 years
Fair value
2.50 percent
3.50 percent
Level percentage of
July 2017 - June 2019
payroll payroll
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 99
Continued from the previous page.
$
$
$
2018 2017
1,318,672 $ 960,254
1 318 672 960 254
$
10,044,005 $ 10,037,542
13.13% 9.57%
December 31, 2013
July 2015 - June 2017
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of
payroll
Fair value
20 years
2. 75 percent
3. 75 percent
7. 75 percent
$
$
$
2016 2015
941 ,321 $ 909,912
941 321 909 912
$
9,428,447 $ 9,000,246
9.98% 10.11 %
December 31, 2011
July 2013 - June 2015
Projected Unit Credit
Level percentage of
payroll
Fair value
NIA
2. 75 percent
3. 75 percent
8.00 percent
2014
$ 866,635
866 635
$
$ 8,701 ,657
9.96%
December 31, 2009
July 2011 - June 2013
Projected Unit Credit
Level percentage of
payroll
Fair value
N/A
2. 75 percent
3. 75 percent
8.00 percent
100 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB Asset and Related Ratios  (Unaudited)
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIA
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30,1
(amounts in millions)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Total OPEB Liability 2
Service Cost $ 1.5          $ 1.9          $ 2.0          $ 2.3          $ 2.5          $ 3.1          $ 3.4
Interest on Total OPEB Liability 24.9        27.3        28.3        30.3        32.4        34.2        33.8
Changes in Benefit Terms –         –         –         –         –         –         –
Changes in Assumptions –         (19.7)       10.7        (16.5)       –         (0.5)         –
Differences Between Expected and Actual Experience (11.6)       (13.0)       (7.1)         (13.0)       (32.3)       (9.1)         –
Benefit Payments (29.8)       (30.6)       (31.3)       (31.8)       (32.2)       (32.5)       (31.2)
Net Change in Total OPEB Liability (15.0)       (34.1)       2.6          (28.7)       (29.6)       (4.8)         6.0
Total OPEB Liability - Beginning 375.4      409.5      406.9      435.6      465.2      470.0      464.0
Total OPEB Liability - Ending $ 360.4      $ 375.4      $ 409.5      $ 406.9      $ 435.6      $ 465.2      $ 470.0
Plan Fiduciary Net Position
Employer Contributions $ 2.1          $ 2.5          $ 3.0          $ 6.3          $ 49.6        $ 48.0        $ 49.8
Net Investment and Other Income 25.2        7.5          171.8      8.6          36.0        50.9        57.6
Benefit Payments (29.8)       (30.6)       (31.3)       (31.8)       (32.2)       (32.6)       (31.2)
Administrative Expense (1.6)         (1.6)         (1.3)         (1.3)         (1.3)         (1.3)         (1.3)
Net Change in Plan Fiduciary Net Position (4.1)         (22.2)       142.2      (18.2)       52.1        65.0        74.9
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Beginning 730.7      752.9      610.7      628.9      576.8      511.8      436.9
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Ending $ 726.6      $ 730.7      $ 752.9      $ 610.7      $ 628.9      $ 576.8      $ 511.8
Net OPEB (Asset) $ (366.2)     $ (355.3)     $ (343.4)     $ (203.8)     $ (193.3)     $ (111.6)     $ (41.8)
Plan Fiduciary Net Position as a Percentage
of the Total OPEB Liability 201.6      % 194.6      % 183.9      % 150.1      % 144.4      % 124.0      % 108.9      %
Covered Payroll $ 3,770.8   $ 3,792.8   $ 3,929.8   $ 3,955.6   $ 4,023.3   $ 4,303.2   $ 4,570.1
Net OPEB (Asset) as a Percentage
of Covered Payroll (9.71)       % (9.37)       % (8.74)       % (5.15)       % (4.80)       % (2.59)       % (0.91)       %
1 10-year trend information will be disclosed prospectively
2 See Table 28 for Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Assumptions: The PERS Board adopted assumption changes that were used to measure the June 30, 2021 total
OPEB liability. The changes include the lowering of the long-term expected rate of return from 7.20 to 6.90 percent
and the inflation rate from 2.5 to 2.4 percent. In addition, the healthy healthcare participation and healthy mortality
assumptions were changed to reflect an updated trends and mortality improvement scale for all groups.
Changes in Benefit Terms and Assumptions:
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Investment Returns  (Unaudited)
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIA
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 301
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Annual Money-Weighted Rate of Return
Net of Investment Expense 3.1% 6.5% 26.3% 0.6% 6.7% 9.7% 12.5%
1 10-year trend information will be disclosed prospectively.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 101
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB Asset and Related Ratios  (Unaudited)
Oth
er Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIPA
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30,1
(amounts in millions)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Total OPEB Liability 2
Service Cost $ 0.9          $ 1.2          $ 1.3          $ 1.4          $ 1.5          $ 1.5          $ 1.5
Interest on Total OPEB Liability 3.3          4.3          4.5          5.1          5.0          5.2          5.0
Changes in Benefit Terms –         –         –         –         –         –         –
Changes in Assumptions –         (11.4)       1.1          (7.9)         –         0.4          –
Differences Between Expected and Actual Experience (3.0)         (4.5)         (4.6)         (2.2)         (0.3)         (3.0)         –
Benefit Payments (3.0)         (3.4)         (3.7)         (4.1)         (4.5)         (4.7)         (4.3)
Net Change in Total OPEB Liability (1.8)         (13.8)       (1.4)         (7.7)         1.7          (0.6)         2.2
Total OPEB Liability - Beginning 49.1        62.9        64.3        72.0        70.3        70.9        68.7
Total OPEB Liability - Ending $ 47.3        $ 49.1        $ 62.9        $ 64.3        $ 72.0        $ 70.3        $ 70.9
Plan Fiduciary Net Position
Employer Contributions $ 8.8          $ 8.3          $ 11.8        $ 11.2        $ 14.0        $ 13.3        $ 11.9
Net Investment and Other Income 3.0          0.8          16.3        0.8          2.5          2.4          2.0
Benefit Payments (3.0)         (3.4)         (3.7)         (4.1)         (4.5)         (4.7)         (4.3)
Administrative Expense (0.7)         (0.7)         (0.3)         (0.3)         (0.3)         (0.3)         (0.3)
Net Change in Plan Fiduciary Net Position 8.1          4.9          24.1        7.6          11.7        10.7        9.3
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Beginning 83.3        78.4        54.3        46.7        35.0        24.3        15.0
Plan Fiduciary Net Position - Ending $ 91.4        $ 83.3        $ 78.4        $ 54.3        $ 46.7        $ 35.0        $ 24.3
Net OPEB Liability/(Asset) $ (44.1)       $ (34.2)       $ (15.5)       $ 10.0        $ 25.3        $ 35.3        $ 46.6
Plan Fiduciary Net Position as a Percentage
of the Total OPEB Liability 193.2      % 169.7      % 124.6      % 84.5        % 64.9        % 49.8        % 34.3        %
Covered Payroll $ 1,153.1   $ 1,125.8   $ 1,159.0   $ 1,166.4   $ 1,120.5   $ 1,165.3   $ 1,327.1
Net OPEB (Asset)/Liability as a Percentage
of Covered Payroll (3.83)       % (3.04)       % (1.34)       % 0.86        % 2.26        % 3.03        % 3.51        %
1 10-year trend information will be disclosed prospectively
2 See Table 28 for Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Assumptions: The PERS Board adopted assumption changes that were used to measure the June 30, 2021 total
OPEB liability. The changes include the lowering of the long-term expected rate of return from 7.20 to 6.90 percent
and the inflation rate from 2.5 to 2.4 percent. In addition, the healthy healthcare participation and cost trend rates, and
healthy mortality assumptions were changed to reflect an updated trends and mortality improvement scale for all groups.
Changes in Benefit Terms and Assumptions:
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Investment Returns  (Unaudited)
Other Postemployment Benefit Plan - RHIPA
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 301
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Annual Money-Weighted Rate of Return
Net of Investment Expense 3.7% 6.8% 26.6% 1.0% 7.6% 10.2% 14.3%
1 10-year trend information will be disclosed prospectively
102 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of OPEB RHIA Employer Contributions1   (Unaudited)
Last 10 Fiscal Years
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019
Actuarially determined contributions1
2,139$          2,458$           2,963$           6,360$           49,615$
Contributions in relation to the actuarially
determined contributions 2,139            2,458             2,963            6,360             49,615
Contribution deficiency (excess) –$             –$              –$             –$              –$
Covered payroll 14,455,011$  12,942,642$   12,235,510$  11,574,796$   10,716,707$
Contributions as a percentage of
covered payroll 0.01% 0.02% 0.02% 0.05% 0.46%
Note:
1 For Actuarial Assumptions and Methods, see table below.
Actuarial Valuation:
Effective:
Actuarial cost method:
Amortization method:
Amortization Period:
Asset valuation method:
Remaining amortization periods:
Actuarial assumptions:
Inflation rate
Healthcare cost trend rates
Projected salary increases
Investment rate of return
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
Market value
20 years
Actuarial Assumptions and Methods Used to Set the Actuarially Determined Contributions
7.50 percent
3.50 percent
None. Statute stipulates $60
monthly payment for
healthcare insurance.
10 years
December 31, 2017
July 2019 - June 2021
December 31, 2015
2.50 percent
July 2017 - June 2019
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
10 years
7.20 percent
Market value
10 years
2.50 percent
None. Statute stipulates $60
monthly payment for healthcare
insurance.
3.50 percent
3.40 percent
6.90 percent
December 31, 2019
July 2021 - June 2023
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
10 years
Market value
10 years
2.40 percent
None. Statute stipulates $60
monthly payment for healthcare
insurance.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 103
Continued from previous page.
2018 2017 2016 2015 2014
$ 47,998 $ 49,786 $ 44,588 $ 53,648 $ 48,253
47,998 49,786 44,588 53,648 48,253
$ $ $ $ $
$ 10,044,005 $10,037,542 $ 9,428,447 $ 9,000,246 $ 8,686,772
048% 0.50% 0.47% 0.60% 0.56%
December 31, 2013 December 31, 2011 December 31, 2009
July 201 5 - June 201 7 Juy 2013 - June 2015 Juy 2011 - June 2013
Entry Age Normal Projected Unit Credit Projected Unit Credit
Le~I percertage of payroll, Level percentage of payroll, Level percertage of
closed closed payroll, closed
10 years 10 years 10 years
Market value Market value Mark et value
20 years N/A N/A
2. 75 percent 2. 75 percert 2. 75 per cert
None. Statute stipulates $60 None. Stall.te stipulates $60 None. Stall.te stipuates
rnorthly payment for monthly payment for $60 monthly p ayrnent for
healthcare insurance. healthcare insurance. healthcare insurance.
3. 75 percent 3. 75 percert 3. 75 per cert
7. 75 percert 8.00 percert 8.00 percert
104 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of OPEB RHIPA Employer Contributions1   (Unaudited)
Last 10 Fiscal Years
(Dollar amounts in thousands)
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019
Actuarially determined contributions1
8,783$             8,265$             11,724$           11,242$           14,009$
Contributions in relation to the actuarially
determined contributions 8,783               8,265               11,724             11,242             14,009
Contribution deficiency (excess) –$                –$                –$                –$                –$
Covered payroll 4,649,973$      4,013,100$      3,794,773$      3,555,791$      3,118,065$
Contributions as a percentage of
covered payroll 0.19% 0.21% 0.31% 0.32% 0.45%
Note:
1 For Actuarial Assumptions and Methods, see table below.
Actuarial Valuation:
Effective:
Actuarial cost method:
Amortization method:
Amortization Period:
Asset valuation method:
Remaining amortization periods:
Actuarial assumptions:
Inflation rate
Healthcare cost trend rates
Projected salary increases
Investment rate of return
6.90 percent
Market value
10 years
2.40 percent
change to: Graded from 7.1
percent in 2019 to 4.0 percent in
2074.
3.40 percent
December 31, 2019
July 2021 - June 2023
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
10 years
December 31, 2015
July 2017 - June 2019
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
10 years
Market value
20 years
2.50 percent
Graded from 6.3 percent in
2016 to 4.4 percent in 2094.
3.50 percent
Actuarial Assumptions and Methods Used to Set the Actuarially Determined Contributions
7.20 percent
Market value
10 years
2.50 percent
Graded from 6.5 percent in 2018
to 4.2 percent in 2093.
3.50 percent
December 31, 2017
July 2019 - June 2021
Entry Age Normal
Level percentage of payroll,
closed
10 years
7.50 percent
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 105
Continued from the previous page.
2018 2017 2016 2015 2014
$ 13 290 $ 11 864 $ 10 967 $ 6 887 $ 6 150
13 290 11 864 10 967 6 887 6 150
$ $ $ $ $
$ 2,952,776 $ 3,024,383 $ 2,850,753 $ 2,737,792 $ 2,566,555
0.45% 0.39% 0.38% 0.25% 0.24%
December 31 2013 December 31 2011 December 31 2009
July 2015 - June 2017 July 2013- June 2015 July 2011 - June 2013
Ertrv Aqe Normal Projected Unit Credit Pro iected U rit Credrt
Level percentage of payrol, Level percentage of payroll, Level percentage of
closed dosed payroll, closed
1 0 years 10 years 10 years
Market value Market value Mark et value
20 years N/A N/A
2. 75 percent 2.75 percent 2.75 percent
Graded from 6.1 percent in Graded from 6.9 percent in Graded from 7.0 percent in
2014 to 4. 7 percent in 2083. 2012 to 4.5 percent in 2029 2010 to 4.5 percent in
2029
3. 75 percent 3.75 percent 3.75 percent
7.75 percent 8.00 percent 8.00 percent
106 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Required Supplementary Information
Schedule of Claims Development Information  (Unaudited)
Standard Retiree Health Insurance Account
Fiscal and Policy Year Ended (In Millions)
2022 2023
1. Net ear
ned required contribution and
investment revenues $ 198.85 $ 226.61 $ 197.92 $ 157.55 $ 176.38 $ 111.68 $ 32.49 $ 31.27 $ 28.91 $ 31.39
2. Unallocated expenses 29.00 32.09 26.30 16.55 16.11 11.36 4.98 4.43 4.19 5.19
3. Estimated incurred claims and expense,
end of policy year 175.41 212.21 179.01 133.10 142.94 83.24 18.27 25.94 31.05 28.15
4. Paid (cumulative) as of:
End of policy year 175.01 211.90 184.61 133.60 142.44 91.57 18.50 25.74 31.04 28.12
One year later 192.78 226.61 200.50 151.25 149.18 98.32 25.05 26.53 31.83
Two years later 192.81 226.61 200.50 151.78 156.07 98.31 25.05 26.53
Three years later 192.81 226.61 200.49 151.75 156.05 98.31 25.05
Four years later 192.81 226.60 200.48 151.75 156.05 98.31
Five years later 192.81 226.60 200.48 151.75 156.05
Six years later 192.81 226.60 200.48 151.75
Seven years later 192.81 226.60 200.48
Eight years later 192.81 226.60
Nine years later 192.81
5. Reestimated incurred claims and expense:
End of policy year 175.41 212.21 179.01 133.10 142.94 83.24 18.27 25.94 31.05 28.15
One year later 193.18 226.92 194.90 151.25 149.68 89.98 24.81 26.73 31.85
Two years later 193.21 226.92 194.91 151.28 156.57 89.97 24.81 26.73
Three years later 193.21 226.91 194.90 151.25 156.55 89.97 24.82
Four years later 193.22 226.91 194.88 151.25 156.55 89.97
Five years later 193.21 226.90 194.88 151.25 156.55
Six years later 193.21 226.90 194.88 151.25
Seven years later 193.21 226.90 194.88
Eight years later 193.21 226.90
Nine years later 193.21
6.
17.80 14.69 15.87 18.15 13.61   6.73    6.55    0.79    0.80
2018 2019 2020 2021
Increase in estimated incurred claims and
expense from end of policy year:
2014 2015 2016 2017
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 107
Other Supplementary Information
108 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Other Supplementary Information
Schedule of Plan Net Position
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
As of June 30, 2023
Employee Pension Oregon Public Service
Stability Account Retirement Plan
Regular PERS 238/Regular Pension
Acc
ount (Tier One/Tier Two) Program
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 1,755,719,333     $ 8,465,420           $ 336,149,271
Receivables:
Empl
oyer 78,523,971          –                     38,151,050
Interest and Dividends 214,807,652        854,873              35,429,040
Investment Sales and Other Receivables 2,682,187,351     10,622,933          440,556,719
Transitional Liability 243,198,241        –                     –
Total Receivables 3,218,717,215     11,477,806          514,136,809
Interaccount Receivables and Payables 17,776,445          –                     (16,499,270)
Due from Other Funds 43,043,051          (19,963,851)        –
Investments:
Debt Securities 13,670,588,519    54,405,010          2,254,741,960
Public Equity 14,235,578,293    56,653,507          2,347,927,864
Real Estate and Real Estate Investment Trusts 10,230,560,327    40,714,687          1,687,365,076
Private Equity 19,872,921,022    79,088,509          3,277,716,159
Real Assets 6,814,795,462     27,120,925          1,123,990,035
Diversifying Strategies 3,732,716,358     14,855,137          615,651,052
Opportunity Portfolio 1,858,665,588     7,396,954           306,556,758
Total Investments 70,415,825,569    280,234,729        11,613,948,904
Securities Lending Collateral 461,229,585        1,836,157           76,091,035
Prepaid Expenses 5,079,898            15,524                643,352
Capital Assets at Cost, Net 16,915,284          –                     1,079,280
Total Assets 75,934,306,380    282,065,785        12,525,549,381
Liabilities:
Investment Purchases and Accrued Expenses 4,442,601,964     15,679,852          650,620,895
Deposits and Other Liabilities 66,999,353          –                     1,942,653
Due to Other Funds 1,449,646            4,351,395           117,130
Leases Payable 36,380                 –                     –
Securities Lending Collateral Due Borrowers 461,215,290        1,836,100           76,088,678
Total Liabilities 4,972,302,633     21,867,347          728,769,356
Net Position Restricted for Pension Benefits $ 70,962,003,747    $ 260,198,438        $ 11,796,780,025
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 109
Continued from the previous page.
Employee Pension
Stability Account Variable
OPSRP Program Account Total
$ 6 ,546 ,353 $ 7,238 ,629 $ 2,114, 119,006
116,675,021
633 ,417 251,724 ,982
7,871 ,050 3,141,238,053
243 , 198,241
8 ,504,467 3,752 ,836,297
(1 ,277 ,175)
8,760 ,306 31,839,506
40 ,311 ,330 16,020,046,819
41 ,977 ,351 245 ,220 ,980 16,927 ,357,995
30,167 ,501 11,988,807 ,591
58 ,600 ,540 23,288,326,230
20 ,095 ,219 7,986,001,641
11 ,006 ,897 4,374,229,444
5,480,765 2,178, 100,065
207 ,639 ,603 245 ,220 ,980 82,762 ,869,785
1,360 ,543 1,588 540,518,908
11 ,502 5,750,276
17,994 ,564
232 ,822 ,774 251 ,184,022 89,225,928 ,342
11 ,617 ,969 2,309 ,818 5,122,830,498
1,569 68,943,575
79,495 5,997,666
36,380
1,360 ,501 1,588 540,502, 157
13,057 ,965 2,312 ,975 5,738 ,310 ,276
$ 219 ,764 ,809 $ 248 ,871 ,047 $ 83,487 ,618 ,066
110 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Continued on the next page.
Other Supplementary Information
Schedule of Changes in Plan Net Position
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Employee Pension Oreg
on Public Service
Stability Account Retirement Plan
Regular PERS 238/Regular Pension
Account (Tier One/Tier Two) Program
Additions:
Contributions:
Employer $ 1,264,588,681
$ –                       $ 1,128,373,791
Plan Member 8,485,558              84,625, 578            –
Total Contributions 1,273,074,239        84,625,578            1,128,373,791
Investment Income:
Net Appreciation
in Fair Value of Investments 1,656,557,123        4,753,574              245,073,191
Interest, Dividends and Other Investment Income 1,712,619,086        6,941,180              281,971,297
Total Investment Income 3,369,176,209        11,694,754            527,044,488
Less Investment Expense (900,792,455)         (3,612,763)             (148,785,582)
Net Investment Income 2,468,383,754        8,081,991              378,258,906
Securities Lending Income:
Securities Lending Income 16,892,484            56,482                   2,604,608
Less Securities Lending Expense (14,609,935)           (48,898)                  (2,253,514)
Net Securities Lending Income 2,282,549              7,584                     351,094
Other Income 374,770                 264                       45,484
Total Additions 3,744,115,312        92,715,417            1,507,029,275
Deductions
Benefits 5,534,432,855        –                       96,837,109
Death Benefits 4,090,901              –                       –
Refunds of Contributions 10,084,306            –                       –
Administrative Expense 52,770,608            264                       13,085,257
Interaccount Transfers (60,907,071)           19,477,654            (1,806,410)
Total Deductions 5,540,471,599        19,477,918            108,115,956
Net Increase/(Decrease) (1,796,356,287)      73,237,499            1,398,913,319
Net Position Restricted for Pension Benefits
72,758,360,034      186,960,939          10,397,866,706
End of Year $ 70,962,003,747      $ 260,198,438          $ 11,796,780,025
Beginning of Year [Restated]
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 111
Continued from the previous page.
Employee Pension
Stability Account Variable
OPSRP Program Account Total
$ –                       $ –                       $ 2,392,962,472
74,205,850             156,339                 167,473,325
74,205,850            156,339                 2,560,435,797
2,997,532              39,070,787            1,948,452,207
5,489,760              63,884                   2,007,085,207
8,487,292              39,134,671            3,955,537,414
(2,855,464)             (227,299)                (1,056,273,563)
5,631,828              38,907,372            2,899,263,851
41,289                   118                       19,594,981
(35,751)                  (118)                      (16,948,216)
5,538                     –                       2,646,765
264                       1,756,317              2,177,099
79,843,480            40,820,028            5,464,523,512
–                       33,269,917            5,664,539,881
–                       –                       4,090,901
–                       88,192                   10,172,498
264                       1,798,627              67,655,020
1,806,410              41,429,417            –
1,806,674              76,586,153            5,746,458,300
78,036,806            (35,766,125)           (281,934,788)
141,728,003          284,637,172          83,769,552,854
$ 219,764,809          $ 248,871,047          $ 83,487,618,066
112 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Other Supplementary Information
Schedule of Administrative Expenses - All Funds
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Personal Services:
Staff Salaries 31,078,373$
Social Security 7,373,901
Retirement 2,373,166
Unemployment Compensation 1,494
Workers' Compensation 7,690
Insurance 7,319,992
Assessments 269,281
Total Personal Services 48,423,897
Professional Services:
Actuarial 589,519
Data Processing 56,054
Legal Counsel 381,005
Medical Consultants 517,000
Training and Recruitment 278,049
Contract Services 13,063,007
Healthcare Fees 4,460,209
Total Professional Services 19,344,843
Communications:
Printing 170,329
Telephone 441,037
Postage 708,094
Travel 138,544
Total Communication 1,458,004
Rentals:
Office Space 237,690
Total Rentals 237,690
Miscellaneous:
Central Government Charges 15,729,695
Supplies 1,474,265
Maintenance 480,910
Non-Capitalized Equipment 1,579,935
Depreciation and Amortization 3,106,715
Other Interest Expenses 807
Other Expenses (450,968)
Total Miscellaneous 21,921,359
Total Administrative Expenses: 91,385,790$
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 113
Other Supplementary Information
Schedule of Payments to Consultants and Contractors
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Indiv
idual or Firm Fees Paid Nature of Service
ACCURATE CORPORATE SERVICES INC 2,671$           Contractual
ADT COMMERCIAL 9,123             Contractual
BAY VIEW BUILDING MAINTENANCE INC 2,400             Contractual
BENEFITHELP SOLUTIONS 3,155,866      Health Insurance
CANTEL SWEEPING 900                Contractual
CASCADE CENTERS INC 13,349           Contractual
CBIZ RISK & ADVISORY SERVICES LLC 63,450           Contractual
CDW 100,511         Contractual
CEDAR MILL CONSTRUCTION COMPANY LLC 8,970             Contractual
CEM-COST EFFECTIVENESS MEASUREMENT INC 50,000           Benchmarking
CITISTREET 2,930,555      Contractual
COAST SWEEPING SERVICE INC 38,860           Contractual
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 503,432         Contractual
DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER & BUSINESS SERVICE 562                Contractual
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 289,870         Legal
DEPAUL INDUSTRIES 16,387           Contractual
EC COMPANY 1,567             Contractual
EMPLOYMENT DEPARTMENT 90,146           Contractual
FIRST RESPONSE 8,620             Contractual
FISHNET SECURITY INC 99,338           Technology
FREDRICK WILLIAM MILLER MD 71,500           Medical
GABRIEL ROEDER SMITH & COMPANY 49,250           Actuarial
GARTNER GROUP INC 658,350         Technology
ICE MILLER 989                Legal
IES COMMERCIAL INC 3,834             Contractual
IMAGE ACCESS CORP 4,800             Contractual
INDEPENDENT ACTUARIES INC 72,000           Actuarial
INDUSTRIAL SOURCE 505                Contractual
J H KELLY LLC 1,028             Contractual
KONE INC 2,808             Contractual
LANCESOFT INC 8,740,088      Technology
LANDCARE 68,383           Contractual
LANGUAGE LINE SOLUTIONS INC 1,499             Contractual
LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL COMMITTEE 2,711             Contractual
LEXISNEXIS RISK DATA MANAGMENT INC 8,677             Technology
MACIAS GINI & O'CONNELL LLP 54,015           Audit
MILLIMAN INC 523,994         Actuarial
NATIONAL INTERPRETING SERVICE INC 5,700             Contractual
OREGON DENTAL SERVICE 2,126,699      Contractual
OREGON MEDICAL EVALUATIONS INC 2,600             Contractual
OREGON UNIONS STATE WORKER 16,680           Contractual
PACIFIC OFFICE AUTOMATION INC 44,882           Contractual
PACIFIC REALTY ASSOCIATES LP 362,555         Contractual
PREMIER CLEANING 1,360             Contractual
PROPOSAL TECHNOLOGIES NETWORK INC 6,850             Contractual
PROTEMP 15,584           Contractual
RAY KLEIN INC 150                Contractual
THE SEGAL COMPANY 517,000         Contractual
TVW INC 143,939         Contractual
VOYA HOLDINGS INC 460,792         IAP Administration
WAGONER GROUP INC 360                Contractual
WEST COAST PLANT CO INC 2,669             Contractual
21,358,828$
114 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Other Supplementary Information
Summary of Investment Fees, Commissions, and Expenses
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
2023 2023
Debt Securities Managers Real Estate Portfolio Managers (continued)
Ashmore Investment Management 443,876$           Harrison Street Core Property Fund Co-Investment 508,750$
Beach Point Capital Management LP 561,278             Harrison Street Real Estate Core Property 1,737,308
Blackrock Financial Management 1,609,088          Harrison Street Real Estate Partners IX 1,687,500
Fidelity Institutional Asset Management 645,010             Harrison Street Real Estate Partners V-A 546,675
Global Evolution 394,202             Harrison Street REP V Co-Investment 158,821
Guggenheim Partners 2,099,520          Harrison Street REP VIII 1,875,000
KKR Asset Management 160,846             Harrison Street US SA V (Non-Core Account) 562,079
Morgan Stanley Investment Management 574,983             Heitman America Real Estate Trust, LP 1,404,851
Oak Hill Advisors 6,176,552          Heritage Fields Capital 287,223
PGIM Fixed Income 415,542             IL & FS India Realty Fund 141,835
PIMCO 769,162             IL & FS India Realty Fund II 121,245
Putnam Investments 1,059,298          JPMCB Strategic Property Fund 2,548,049
Schroder Investment Management 1,603,107          Landmark Real Estate Partners VII, LP 177,256
Wellington Management Company 1,061,043          LBA Core Industrial 3,520,137
Western Asset Management Company 1,253,478          LBA Logistics Value Fund IX 2,250,000
Domestic Equity Fund Managers Lincoln CIP - Value Add 149,088
AQR Capital Management, LLC 156,714             Lincoln CIP Industrial Core 6,636,913
Dimensional Fund Advisors LTD 2,029,014          Lincoln Non Mandate 596,812
Eudaimonia Asset Management 1,148,271          Lion Mexico Fund 167,408
Newton Investment 1,061,889          Lionstone One Value Add 2,605,043
International Equity Fund Managers Lone Star Fund IX 117,966
Acadian Asset Management 3,143,744          Lone Star Fund VIII 45,654
Adrian Lee & Partners 1,300,000          Lone Star Real Estate Fund IV 217,168
AHL Partners LLP 2,045,813          Lone Star Real Estate Fund V 217,980
Alliance Bernstein International 731,665             LORE One, L.P. (Core) 6,049,038
AQR Capital Management, LLC 1,790,008          Madison Realty Capital Debt Fund III, LP 1,098,802
Arrowstreet Capital, LP 11,494,503        Morgan Stanley Prime Property Fund 3,334,342
Aspect Capital Limited 1,060,555          Nuveen U.S. Cities Industrial Fund 1,057,833
Brandes Investment Partners LP 1,607,635          Nuveen U.S. Cities Multifamily Fund 528,917
Cantillon Capital Management LLC 1,014,212          Oak Street Real Estate Capital Fund V 1,449,994
Dimensional Fund Advisors LTD 1,178,076          Oak Street Real Estate Capital Fund VI 62,230
EAM Investors, LLC 676,379             Och Ziff RE III (Sculptor 3) 195,920
Genesis Asset Managers 807,566             Oregon Abacus Multifamily Associates LP 2,891,391
Harris Associates 1,577,924          Prologis Targeted Europe Logistics Fund 2,285,080
Lazard Asset Management 3,310,485          Prologis Targeted US Logistic Fund 4,248,598
Los Angeles Capital Management 2,107,550          Regency Core 1,187,440
OPERF Intl Transition Fund / State Street Bank 84,369               Regency II 1,537,280
Pangora Asset Management 1,107,345          Rockpoint Growth and Income Fund I, LP 637,582
PE Global 1,800,000          Rockpoint Real Estate Fund IV 43,379
Walter Scott Management 2,277,555          RREEF America REIT II 1,149,349
Westwood Global Investments 681,583             Sculptor Diversified Real Estate Income Trust 379,923
William Blair & Company 1,289,403          Sculptor RE IV 1,312,500
Real Estate Portfolio Managers Starwood Cap Hospitality Fd II Global LP 64,001
Abacus Multi-Family Partners VI 1,995,873          Vornado Capital Partners L.P. 124,610
ABKB / Lasalle Advisors-Intl 956,975             Walton Street Real Estate Core-Plus Fund 1,301,648
Aetos Capital Asia III 11,884               Waterton Fund IX PT Chicago, LLC 582,000
Aetos Capital Asia TE II 33,051               Waterton Residential Property Venture XII 525,962
AEW Core Property Trust 700,862             Waterton Residential Property Venture XIV 1,500,000
AEW Essential Housing Fund 445,851             Waterton Residential Property XI 84,753
Ascentris - OR Partners LLC 5,144,390          Windsor Columbia Realty Fund 12,450,413
Ascentris Core 1,184,486          Windsor Columbia Realty Non-Core 389,899
Blackstone Real Estate Partners IX, LP 3,283,309          Private Equity Portfolio Managers
Blackstone Real Estate Partners VII, LP 13,486               A&M Capital Partners 248,959
Blackstone Real Estate Partners X 2,487,319          A&M Capital Partners Europe 2,274,885
Brazil Real Estate Opportunities II 198,488             A&M Capital Partners II 1,909,829
Cameron Village 591,080             A&M Capital Partners III 3,000,000
Clarion 689,036             ACON Equity Partners IV 1,602,699
Clarion (Non Mandate) 321,036             Advent Global Technology 638,381
Clarion Columbia Office Property 4,428,543          Advent Global Technology II 1,500,000
Columbia Woodbourne Holdings, LLC 161,811             Advent International Global Private Equity VI A 127,645
DivcoWest Fund IV REIT, LP 28,103               Advent International Global Private Equity VII C 194,477
DivcoWest Fund V 2,006,329          Advent International Global Private Equity IX 1,183,930
DivcoWest Real Estate Fund VI 2,164,487          Advent International Global Private Equity X 2,989,252
DW-Columbia Perfco, LP 1,728,579          Advent Latin American Private Equity VI 930,838
GID Mainstay Fund 1,041,851          Advent Latin American Private Equity VII 3,000,001
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 115
Other Supplementary Information
Summary of Investment Fees, Commissions, and Expenses
For
the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
2023 2023
Private Equity Portfolio Managers (continued) Private Equity Portfolio Managers (continued)
Alpine Investors VIII 2,000,000$        KKR Asian Fund III 1,910,634$
APAX IX 2,099,129          KKR European Fund III 212,601
APAX VIII 534,641             KKR North America Fund XI 138,337
Apollo Investment Fund VIII 299,313             KKR North America Fund XII 4,024,430
Apollo Investment Fund IX 4,228,507          KKR North America Fund XIII 3,437,500
Aquiline Financial Services Fund IV 2,478,488          KPS Special Situations Fund V 625,000
Aquiline Financial Services Fund V 4,180,822          KSL Capital Partners Fund III 272,517
Aquiline Financial Services Fund III 736,516             KSL Capital Partners Fund IV 1,208,887
Arsenal Capital Partners Growth 1,447,864          KSL Capital Partners Fund V 1,551,843
Arsenal Capital Partners VI 3,000,000          Luminate Capital Partners Fund III 3,000,000
Blackstone Capital Partners VII 2,423,646          Mayfield Select 62,278
Blackstone Capital Partners VIII 6,250,000          Mayfield Select II 199,499
Blackstone Energy Partners II 1,188,043          Mayfield XIV 552,840
Bridgepoint Europe VI 2,437,288          Mayfield XV 691,299
Bridgepoint Europe VI (Sidecar) 136,954             Mayfield XVI 531,003
Capital International Private Equity Fund VI 370,602             MBK Partners Fund IV 2,101,686
CDH Fund V 819,764             MHR Institutional Partners IV 2,017,460
Centerbridge Capital Partners III 1,146,278          Novalpina Capital Fund I 81,894
Centerbridge Capital Partners IV 3,500,001          Oak Investments Partners XIII 149,105
Centerbridge Special Credit Partners III 606,033             Oaktree European Principal Fund III (US) 196,041
Centerbridge Special Credit Partners III - Flex 5,583,337          Oaktree Opportunities Fund VIIIb 37,058
Cinven VI Fund 1,114,897          Oaktree Opportunities Fund X 457,011
Cinven VII Fund 2,946,070          Oaktree Opportunities Fund Xb 1,360,000
Cinven VIII Fund 775,608             Oaktree Opportunities Fund IX 628,544
Clearlake Capital Partners VI 2,625,000          Oaktree Opportunities Fund XI 3,972,874
Clearlake Capital Partners VII 4,250,000          Odyssey Investment Partners Fund VI 3,000,000
Clearvue Partners III 2,400,000          OrbiMed Private Investments V 158,618
CVC Capital Partners Asia V 2,250,000          OrbiMed Private Investments VI 649,907
CVC Capital Partners VI (A) 1,086,712          Orchid Asia VII 4,182,644
CVC Capital Partners VII (A) 2,419,949          Palladium Equity Partners IV 667,978
CVC Capital Partners VIII 5,476,575          Palladium Equity Partners V 4,000,000
EnCap Energy Capital Fund X 803,690             Pathway Private Equity Fund III-B 1,009,440
EnCap Energy Capital Fund XI 3,261,709          Pathway Private Equity Fund III-CO 5,234,041
Francisco Partners Agility II 750,000             Permira VI 2,278,287
Francisco Partners III 43,392               Permira VII 2,570,307
Francisco Partners IV 1,022,937          Permira VIII 3,665,093
Francisco Partners V 2,069,588          Public Pension Capital 1,276,317
Francisco Partners VI 3,750,000          Rhône Partners V 1,966,365
General Atlantic Partners 10,529,500        Roark Capital Partners IV 952,322
Genstar Capital Partners VIII 1,086,505          Roark Capital Partners V 3,511,263
Genstar Capital Partners IX 1,569,539          Roark Capital Partners VI 4,375,000
Genstar Capital Partners X 2,450,000          RRJ Capital Master Fund II 88,574
Genstar VIII Opportunities Fund I 332,632             RRJ Capital Master Fund III 862,069
Genstar IX Opportunities Fund I 595,260             Sherpa Healthcare I 848,160
Genstar X Opportunities Fund I 395,189             Sherpa Healthcare II 1,125,000
GGV Capital Select 178,963             TA XIV 1,746,408
GGV Capital V 520,690             TDR Capital III 680,585
GGV Capital VI 622,402             TDR Capital IV 2,622,742
GGV Capital VII 1,043,627          TDR Capital V 2,193,515
GGV Capital VIII 1,440,000          TPG Partners IX 3,603,945
GGV Discovery II 352,555             T homa Bravo Fund XIV 3,410,699
GGV Discovery III 600,000             Thoma Bravo Fund XV 3,750,000
GI Partners Fund IV 921,358             TPG Growth III (A) 1,283,526
GI Partners Fund V 2,923,138          TPG Growth IV 1,897,825
Granite Ventures II 88,836               TPG Growth V 3,718,753
Green Equity Investors VI 581,697             TPG Healthcare Partners 993,229
Green Equity Investors VII 1,390,981          TPG Healthcare Partners II 900,987
GTCR Fund XII 1,851,202          TPG Partners VII 1,345,136
GTCR Fund XIII 2,728,859          TPG Partners VIII 4,167,632
GTCR Strategic Growth Fund 929,356             TSG Consumer Partners 9 3,750,000
Hamilton Lane International SMID Fund 750,000             USV 2021 210,000
Hellman & Friedman Capital Partners VIII 545,996             USV Climate 2021 247,500
Hellman & Friedman Capital Partners IX 3,150,797          USV Climate 2022 176,168
Hellman & Friedman Capital Partners X 5,249,996          USV Opportunity 2019 243,750
KKR Asian Fund II 651,859             Veritas Capital Fund IV 26,579
116 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Other Supplementary Information
Summary of Investment Fees, Commissions, and Expenses
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
2023 2023
Private Equity Portfolio Managers (continued) Real Assets Portfolio Managers (continued)
Veritas Capital Fund V 1,261,380$        Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund 557,476$
Veritas Capital Fund VI 2,488,563          Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund II (AIV II Claremont) 625,000
Veritas Capital Fund VII 3,236,557          Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund II 789,101
Veritas Capital Fund VIII 5,465,753          Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund III 3,778,522
Vista Equity Partners Fund IV 617,418             Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund IV 4,642,856
Vista Equity Partners Fund V 1,705,996          Taurus Mining Finance Fund II 1,875,000
Vista Equity Partners Fund VI 5,670,530          Tillridge Global Agribusiness Partners II 1,208,166
Vista Equity Partners Fund VII 7,500,000          Twin Creeks Timber 690,777
Vista Equity Partners Fund VIII 1,470,995          Warwick Partners III 2,376,071
Vista Foundation Fund II 514,069             Warwick Partners IV 3,441,274
Vista Foundation Fund III 2,448,164          Westbourne Infrastructure Debt 6 648,117
Vitruvian Investment Partns IV 2,922,315          Diversifying Strategies Portfolio Managers
Real Assets Portfolio Managers AQR Multi-Strategy Fund X 3,901,701
Alinda Infrastructure Fund II 6,255                 Aspect Core Trend HV Fund 4,987,819
Alterna Core Capital Assets Fund II 830,672             Blackrock Style Advantage 353,765
Appian Natural Resources Fund 521,019             Brevan Howard 5,798,188
Appian Natural Resources Fund II 1,730,185          Bridgewater All Weather 1,165,907
Appian Natural Resources Fund III 1,650,685          Bridgewater Optimal Portfolio 1,484,404
Blackstone Energy Partners III 2,500,000          Bridgewater Pure Alpha Major Markets II 3,535,576
Brookfield Infrastructure Fund III B 3,163,790          Caxton Global Investments (USA) 3,995,769
Brookfield Infrastructure Fund IV 4,317,143          Davidson Kempner Institutional Partners 4,694,666
Brookfield Infrastructure Fund V 3,947,178          Dorsal Capital Partners 250,000
Brookfield Super-Core Infrastructure Partners 1,893,060          Fort Global Trend Fund Series A 2020 1,771,784
Brookfield Timberlands Fund V 27,389               GMO Systematic Global Macro 5,518,222
Cube Infrastructure Fund III 2,196,247          Hudson Bay Fund 6,383,018
Digital Colony Partners 1,470,491          Man AHL Alpha 4,237,501
EMR Capital Resources Fund II 1,947,027          Man AHL Alpha Core 112,071
EnCap Flatrock Midstream Fund III 466,349             Marshall Wace Alpha Plus (US) Fund II 1,715,025
EnCap Flatrock Midstream Fund IV 1,341,937          Reservoir Strategic Partners Fund 492,621
EnCap Flatrock Midstream Fund V 1,003,333          Opportunity Portfolio Managers
The Energy & Minerals Group Fund III 1,674,557          Arctos Sports Partners Fund I 1,338,936
EnerVest Energy Institutional Fund XIV 772,954             Arctos Sports Partners Fund II 2,276,580
EQT Infrastructure Fund III 907,460             Blackstone Tactical Opportunity Fund 1,511,570
EQT Infrastructure Fund IV - USD Fund 3,621,024          Blackstone Tactical Opportunity Fund II 234,276
EQT Infrastructure Fund V 4,715,804          Blue Torch Credit Opportunities Fund II 1,296,528
EQT Infrastructure V Co-Investment Fund 99,358               Clearlake Flagship Plus Partners 1,499,911
GIP Aquarius Fund 375,000             Content Partners Fund 3 430,612
Global Infrastructure Partners Capital Solutions Fund 1,385,106          Fidelity Real Estate Opportunistic Income Fund 980,401
Global Infrastructure Partners II A1 849,314             Lone Star Fund X 77,291
Global Infrastructure Partners III 4,208,477          Nephila Juniper Catastrophe Fund 58,583
Global Infrastructure Partners IV 5,199,999          Nephila Palmetto Fund 13,446
Harrison Street SIF Co-Investment I 532,831             OHA Tactical Investment Fund 4,035,089
Harrison Street Social Infrastructure Fund 2,076,632          OrbiMed Royalty Opportunities Fund II 68,052
Highstar Capital Fund IV 56,944               Pathlight Capital Fund II 1,250,000
Homestead Capital USA Farmland Fund II 1,360,009          Pathlight Capital Fund III 1,274,306
International Infrastructure Finance Company Fund 125,760             Sanders Capital All Asset Value Fund 3,750,754
LS Power Equity Partners IV 3,082,447          Sixth Street Specialty Lending Europe II 541,789
LS Power Fund III Feeder 1 871,543             TPG Specialty Lending Europe I (US Feeder) 176,507
NGP Agribusiness Follow-on Fund 648,405             TSSP Adjacent Opportunities Partners 3,769,052
NGP Natural Resources X 240,800             TSSP TAO Contingent 1,248,226
NGP Natural Resources XI 1,839,288          Whitehorse Liquidity Partner IV 1,400,000
NGP Natural Resources XII 3,555,494          Whitehorse Liquidity Partner V 1,401,225
NGP Royalty Partners 933,418             Russell Investments - Cash Overlay 909,486
NGP Royalty Partners Fund II 1,143,700          BlackRock  - Variable Fund 133,500
Northern Shipping Fund III 152,243             IAP Target Date Funds: Alliance Bernstein 3,885,500
Northern Shipping Fund IV 2,250,000          IAP Target Date Funds: State Street Bank 450,196
QL Capital Partners 1,912,414          Brokerage Commissions 8,321,526
Quantum Energy Partners VIII 2,734,511          Consulting and Subscription Fees 12,762,315
Sheridan Production Partners III-B 1,197,465          State Street Bank:
Silver Creek Aggregate Reserves Fund I 268,374             Incentive Fee/Carried Interest 258,790,116
Sprott Annex 205,908             Foreign Income Taxes 15,102,534
Sprott Private Resource Royal 793,885             Operating Expenses1 180,652,683
Starwood Energy Infrastructure Fund III 2,250,000          Other Expenses2 39,254,089
Stonepeak Core Fund 1,097,363          State Treasury Administrative Fees 28,256,670
Stonepeak Global Renewables Fund 1,363,636          Deferred Compensation Investment Fees and Expenses 6,220,874
Total Investment Fees, Commissions and Expenses 1,196,305,251$
1Start up fee for new private equity fund and improvement made to real estate property.
2Expenses related to legal, travel, and other adjustments.
Investment
Section
118 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 119
OREGON
STATE
TREASURY
October 15, 2023
Dear PERS Members:
Tobias Read
Oregon State Treasurer
Michael Kaplan
Deputy State Treasurer
The Investment Division of the Oregon State Treasury (OST) manages a collection of portfolios on behalf of
the State, which help fund many important State objectives including retirement security for public sector
employees , academic support for Oregon schoolchildren, and compensation claims for injured state workers.
In aggregate, the Investment Division oversees assets of approximate ly $136.6 billion as of June 30, 2023.
This portfolio includes the Oregon Public Employee Retirement Fund (OPERF), which advanced 3.17% last
fiscal year, totaled $96.7 billion at June 30, 2023 and comprised the Oregon Public Employee Retirement
System Defined Benefit Pension Plan, the Individual Account Program of the Oregon Public Service
Retirement Plan and other post-employment benefit plans.
Consistent with institutional investment standards, OPERF is broadly and deliberately diversified across
multiple risk factors, including, but not limited to, several asset classes and geographies. On behalf of all
Oregon Public Employee Retirement System beneficiaries, OPERF assets are commingled, invested consistent
with a common set of objectives and allocated among the following six, strateg ic investment categor ies: public
equity, private equity, real estate, fixed income, real assets, and diversifying strateg ies. Return expectations
and target allocations for each of these six categories are developed between staff and external consultants ;
moreover , return forecasts contemp late a 20-year investment horizon. Importantly , equity-oriented
investments represent OPERF's largest capital allocation. While improving the likelihood of generating an
adequate, long-term return, this equity-biased approach a lso produces higher levels of uncertainty of short-term
portfolio return. The breadth of diversification that underpins the OPERF portfolio attempts to lower the
State's risk in the variability of contribution rates and funded status.
With the high levels of inflation seemingly, albeit not completely , behind us, the MSCT ACWI IMI Net index
was up 16.1 %1 during the fiscal year. And with this positive market return as backdrop, OPERF Regular
Account produced a gain of3.2 %. As we have noted in the past, our highly diversified portfolio tends to lag
when the equity markets are producing above average positive returns, but also tends to perform better relative
to equity markets when risky assets are declining rapidly. This is due to the fact that OPERF has a mix of
exposure to both stocks and bonds investments. The level of risk in OPERF is similar to that of a portfo lio that
is 70% in stocks and 30% in bonds; therefore, performing better in down markets and worse in up markets.
Over a full market cycle, these characteristics, which highlight how we are differen t than a simple stocks only
portfolio, evens itself out. Annualized net returns for the five- and ten-year periods ended June 30, 2023 were
8.1 % and 8.3%, respectively. Over the same five- and ten-year periods , a portfolio simply in 70% stocks and
1 All perfonnance figures cited throughout this letter are based on market values and time-weighted return calculations.
Investment Division
16290 SW Upper Boones Ferry Road
Tigard, OR 97224
503.431. 7900
Main Office
867 Hawthorne Ave SE
Salem, OR 97301
503.378.4000
oregon.gov/treasury
oregon .treasurer@stat e.or.us
120 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
STATE
TREASURY
Tobias Read
Oregon State Treasurer
Michael Kaplan
Deputy State Treasurer
30% bonds produced returns of 5.8% and 6.6%, respectively. That is to say, OPERF produced greater returns
at a similar level of risk.
The U.S. stock market (as measured by the Russell 3000 index) generated a gain last fiscal year (FY 2023), of
18.9% over the 12-month period ended June 30, 2023. With a net gain of 16.2%, OPERF's U.S. public equity
portfolio underperformed its Russell 3000 benchmark due to an emphasis on equity "sty le" factors such as
value and small capitalization stocks. Foreign equities continued to lag domestic stocks in FY 2023, but our
collection of managers who invest oversees produced significant outperformance relative to their opportunity
set. OPERF managers investing abroad produced a collective 15.0% gain last fiscal year, better than the
12.5% gain by OPERF's non-U.S. public equity benchmark, the MSCI ACWI Ex-US IMI Net index.
With an estimated fiscal year-end value of$25.9 billion, OPERF 's private equity investments represented
27.8% of total OPERF assets at June 30, 2023, and generated a net loss of 1.8% in FY 2023. At 13.9%,
average annual returns over the previous l 0-year period fell short of the 15. l % return for the benchmark, the
Russell 3000 (lagged one quarter) plus 300 basis points. This relative underperformance is to be expected
when the public equity market s are strongly rallying. This is in stark contrast to when the markets are falling,
e.g. fiscal year 2022, when private equity performed quite a bit better. This short term break down in
relationship with one another ebbs and flows, but trends back inline over longer time periods. All in all,
regardless of public or private, we are making equity investments in businesses with the expectation that we
will earn a rate of return that is consistent with the fundamental cashflows earned by each business.
In real estate, OPERF capital is allocated across four property or security types: core, value-add, opportunistic,
and publicly-traded real estate investment trusts (i.e., REITs). In FY 2023, OPERF's real estate investments
generated a I .4% net loss, ahead the 3.9% loss on OPERF 's real estate benchmark, the NCREIF Fund Index -
Open End Diversified Core Equity, lagged one quarter. At fiscal year-end, these real estate investments were
valued at$ I 3.6 billion, and represented 14.6% of total OPERF assets. For the ten-year period ended June 30,
2023, OPERF's real estate portfolio delivered a net 9.7% on an average annual basis, ahead of the
benchmark 's 8.3% average annual return during that same period. The post-Covid realities for real estate
investing still lingers, further exacerbated by the higher levels of interest rates for real estate loans. We
continue to adjust this portfolio amongst property and security types.
The higher level of interest rates and inflation continued to prove a challenging environment for fixed income
managers. Investments in fixed income securities comprised 22.9% of total OPERF assets at June 30, 2023,
and produced a gain of0.7 % net return in FY 2023, but still beat the loss of0.9 % return recorded by OPERF 's
custom fixed income benchmark.
In 2021, the Oregon Investment Council officially adopted the separation of the "Alternatives" portfolio into
its component parts of Real Assets and Diversifying Strategies. These two programs produced returns of9 .5%
and 5.8%, respecti vely, for FY 2023. Both programs beat their respective benchmarks. The Real Assets
Investment Division
16290 SW Upper Boones Ferry Road
Tigard, OR 97224
503.431.7900
Main Office
867 Hawth orne Ave SE
Salem, OR 97301
503.378.4000
oregon.gov/treasury
oregon.treasurer@state.o r.us
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 121
OREGON
STATE
TREASURY
Tobias Read
Oregon State Treasurer
Micha el Kaplan
Deputy State Treasurer
program is benchmarked to CPI+4% , which produced a gain of7. l % for the fiscal year. The Diversifying
Strategies benchmark is the HFRI: FoF Conservative Index, which was nearly flat for this period at 3.5% gain.
Sincerely,
Rex T. Kin1
Chief Investment Officer
Investment Division
16290 SW Upper Boones Ferry Road
Tigard, OR 97224
503.431.7900
Mai n Office
867 Hawthorne Ave SE
Salem, OR 97301
S03.378.4000
orego n .gov/treasury
oregon.treasurer@state.or.us
122 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 123
INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
The function of PERS is to provide present and future retirement or survivor benefits for its members. The
investment program for the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund (OPERF) — which includes PERS’ Defined
Benefit Pension Plan, Individual Account Program, and other postemployment benefit plans — is managed to
provide long-term financial security for PERS members while maintaining the fund’s stability and future productivity.
The Oregon Investment Council (OIC) has established policies that promote and guide investment strategies with
the highest probability of achieving the PERS Board’s approved, actuarial discount rate at a corresponding risk level
deemed acceptable for both active and retired PERS members.
DESCRIPTION OF INVESTMENT POLICIES
Oregon Revised Statute (ORS) 293.706 established the Oregon Investment Council, which consists of five voting
members. Four members of the council, who are qualified by training and experience in the field of investment or
finance, are appointed by the Governor, subject to state Senate confirmation. The State Treasurer serves as the
council’s remaining voting member. In addition, the director of PERS serves as a nonvoting OIC member.
ORS 293.701 defines the investment funds over which OIC has responsibility. Included are the OPERF and the
Deferred Compensation Fund. OIC establishes policies for the investment and reinvestment of moneys in the
investment funds as well as the acquisition, retention, management, and disposition of investments in the
investment funds. OIC is also responsible for providing an examination of the effectiveness of the investment
program.
OIC ens ures  moneys in the investment funds are invested and reinvested to make the moneys as productive as
possible. Furthermore, the investments of those funds are managed as a prudent investor would do under the
prevailing circumstances and in light of the purposes, terms, distribution requirements, and laws governing each
investment fund. This standard requires the exercise of reasonable care, skill, and caution; it is applied to
investments not in isolation but in the context of each fund’s portfolio as part of an overall investment strategy. The
strategy should incorporate risk and return objectives reasonably suitable to the particular investment fund.
When implementing investment decisions, OIC has a duty to diversify the investments of the investment funds
unless, under the circumstances, it is not prudent to do so. In addition, OIC must act with prudence when selecting
agents and delegating authority. OIC has approved the following asset classes for OPERF: Short-Term Investing,
Fixed Income, Real Estate, Public Equity, Private Equity, Real Assets, and Diversifying Strategies. In addition,
OPERF invests in the Opportunity portfolio, which may be populated with investment approaches across a wide
range of investment opportunities with no limitation as to asset classes or strategies. OIC must approve, in advance,
the purchase of investments in a new asset class not described above.
OIC has an  open-door policy wherein investment officers employed by the Oregon State Treasury will hear and
consider investment proposals and solicitations from any person, firm, or partnership that submits a proposal or
solicitation in good faith. However, under no circumstance does this policy require that the Oregon State Treasury
purchase the proposed investment.
OIC maintains an equal opportunity policy. When awarding contracts or agreements, OIC does not discriminate
because of age, race, color, sex, religion, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, or disability. Furthermore,
OIC encourages firms doing or seeking to do business with OIC to have equal opportunity programs. OIC requires
that all written contracts or agreements with OIC incorporate a reference that affirms compliance with applicable
nondiscrimination, equal opportunity, and contract compliance laws.
In compliance with ORS 192.630-660, OIC holds its meetings in a public forum. Public notice, including a meeting
agenda, is provided to interested persons and news media who have requested notice. Written minutes and
recordings are taken at all meetings.
OIC regularly reviews various aspects of investment policy, performance of investment managers and accounts,
asset allocation, and a large number of investment proposals and recommendations. OIC’s statement of Investment
Objectives and Policy Framework is available on the Oregon State Treasury website at
https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/invested-for-oregon/Documents/Invested-for-OR-OIC-INV/Invested-for-OR-OIC-
INV-1203--Statement-of-Investment-Objectives-and-Policy-Framework.pdf.
124 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Investment Results*
1-Year 3-Year 5-Year
T
otal Portfolio, Excluding Variable Account 3.17 % 11.26 % 8.08 %
OPERF Policy Benchmark1 3.73 9.35   7.54
Variable Account 16.42    11.29 7.97
B
enchmark: MSCI All Country World Investable 16.14 10.97   7.65
Market Index Net
Domestic Stocks 16.16     14.10    9.40
Benchmark: Russell 3000 Index 18.95    13.89 11.39
International Stocks 14.99     11.19    5.74
Benchmark: MSCI All Country 12.47     7.33   3.38
World ex-US Investable Market Index Net
Fixed Income Segment 0.70 (2.48)    1.40
Benchmark: Oregon Custom Fixed Income Benchmark2 (0.94) (3.58) 0.68
Real Estate (1.38) 11.41     8.89
Benchmark: Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark3 (3.91)    7.46 6.56
Private Equity (1.84)      20.68   15.36
Benchmark: Russell 3000 Index + 300 bps (Adj.)4 (5.81)      21.99   13.74
Real Assets 9.54 15.49 7.60
Ben
chmark: Consumer Price Index + 4% 7.08 9.99 8.04
Diversifying Strategies 5.83 10.15 1.56
Benchmark: HFRI FOF Conservative Index 3.47 6.01 3.89
Opportunity Portfolio 6.10 15.42 9.68
Benchmark: OPERF Policy Benchmark5 3.73 11.20 9.17
Periods Ended June 30, 2023
Annualized
The rates of return reported in the Investment Section are based on a time-weighted rate of return methodology based
upon fair values, unless disclosed otherwise in the footnotes to the associated tables.
* Investment Results are based upon OIC asset classes as determined by each manager's primary investment type, not
the financial statement classification of individual holdings.
1 From July 1, 2016 to March 31, 2018 the policy benchmark was 20% Russell 3000+300 Bps quarter lag, 22.5% Oregon
Custom FI Benchmark, 12.5% Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark, 40% MSCI ACWI IMI Net and 5% CPI+4%. From
Apr
il 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018 the policy benchmark was 19% Russell 3000+300 Bps quarter lag, 22% Oregon
Custom FI Benchmark, 12.5% Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark, 39% MSCI ACWI IMI Net and 7.5% CPI+4%.
From January 1, 2019 to June 30, 2020 the policy benchmark was 19% Russell 3000+300 Bps quarter lag, 21% Oregon
Custom FI Benchmark, 12.5% Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark, 37.5% MSCI ACWI IMI Net and 10% CPI+4%.
From July 1, 2020 to September 30, 2021 the policy benchmark was 19% Russell 3000+300Bps quarter lag, 20%
Oregon Custom FI Benchmark, 12.5% Oregon Custom Real Estate Benchmark, 33.5% MSCI ACWI IMI Net, 12.50%
CPI+4%, and 2.50% S&P Risk Parity - 12% Target Volatility. From October 1, 2021 to March 31, 2023 the policy
benchmark was 20% Russell 3000+300 Bps quarter lag, 20% BBG U.S. Aggregate, 12.50% NCRIEF ODCE (Custom),
30% MSCI ACWI IMI Net, 7.50% CPI+4%, 7.50% HFRI FOF Conservative Index and 2.50 % S&P Risk Parity - 12%
Target Volatility. From April 1, 2023 to Present, the policy benchmark is 20% Russell 3000+300Bps quarter lag, 25%
BBG U.S. Aggregate, 12.50% NCRIEF ODCE (Custom), 27.5% MSCI ACWI IMI Net, 7.50% CPI+4% and 7.50% HFRI
FOF Conservative Index.
2 From March 1, 2016 to September 30, 2021, index was 46% BBG Aggregate Bond, 37% BBG Treasury, 13% S&P
LSTA and 4% BofA ML High Yield Master II. From October 1, 2021 to Present, index is 100% Bloomberg U.S. Aggregate.
3 Starting July 1, 2017, methodology for monthly return is calculated by geometrically linking prior months returns, and
then deriving the monthly returns by calculating the geometric average. Returns are not actual monthly, but rather
equiv
alent for all intra-quarter months, in order to match the actual quarterly return.
4 The monthly return is calculated as the geometrically linked monthly-portion of the quarterly return. Returns are not
actual monthly, but rather equivalent for all intra-quarter months, in order to match the actual quarterly return.
5 From September 1, 2006 to March 31, 2023, the policy benchmark was 100% CPI+5%. From April 1, 2023 to Present,
benchmark is 100% OPERF policy benchmark. The 1-Year return of 3.73% represents the OPERF policy benchmark.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 125
OIC Target and Actual Investment Allocation as of June 30, 2023*
OIC Target Actual
Asset Class/Strategy Allocation2 Asset Class/Strategy Allocation
Debt Securities 20.0 - 30.0 % 25.0 % Debt Securities 20.0 %
Public Equity 22.5 - 32.5 27.5 Public Equity 23.3
Real Estate 9.0 - 16.5 12. 5 Real Estate 13.6
Private Equity 17.5 - 27.5 20.0 Private Equity 26.5
Real Assets 2.5 - 10.0 7.5 Real Assets 9.1
Diversifying Strategies 2.5 - 10.0 7.5 Diversifying Strategies 5.0
Opportunity Portfolio1 0.0 - 5.0 0.0 Opportunity Portfolio 2.5
Total 100.0 % Total 100.0 %
1Opportunity Portfolio is an investment strategy. Up to 5% of total Fund assets may be invested in it.
OIC Policy
Range
* The OIC Target Allocations are based on OIC asset classes as determined by each manager's primary investment type,
not the financial statement classification of individual holdings. The Target Allocation amounts do not include Deferred
Compensation Plan investments. The Actual Investment Allocation is based on the financial statement investment
classifications, including Deferred Compensation Plan investments.
2The target allocation of Debt Securities is increased by 5% and Public Equity is reduced by 2.5% from FY2022, and
the allocation to Risk Parity is eliminated.
16.6%
4.3%
1.2%
11.9%
9.4%
6.5%
0.5%
25.5%
6.3%
3.2%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Total Fund Performance
10-Year Review, One-Year Returns
Debt
Securities
20.0%
Public
Equity
23.3%
Real
Estate
13.6%
Private
Equity
26.5%
Real
Assets
9.1%
Diversifying
Strategies
5.0%
Opportunity
Portfolio
2.5%
Investment Mix by Asset Class/Strategy
126 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
List of Largest Assets Held
Description Shares Fair Value
Microsoft Corporation 1,413,328             481,294,717$
Apple Inc. 2,462,939             477,736,278
NVIDIA Corporation 634,499                268,405,767
Meta Platforms, Inc. Class A 774,439                222,248,504
Broadcom Inc. 185,651                161,039,247
Amazon.com, Inc. 1,224,880             159,675,357
Alphabet Inc. Class A 1,237,974             148,185,488
Eli Lilly and Company 267,813                125,598,941
Cisco Systems, Inc. 2,368,807             122,562,074
Visa Inc. Class A 508,912                120,856,422
Description Par Value Fair Value
U.S. Treasury Note 1.625% 292,886,200$       271,423,133$
Due February 15, 2026
U.S. Treasury Note 2.250% 211,200,000         199,534,499
Due November 15, 2025
FNMA TBA 30 Year Single Family Conventional 5% 130,000,000         196,980,000
Issue August 2052
U.S. Treasury Note 0.750% 210,180,000         180,295,031
Due January 31, 2028
U.S. Treasury Note 0.375% 193,570,000         173,789,566
Due January 31, 2026
U.S. Treasury Note 2.750% 179,975,000         164,993,487
Due August 15, 2032
U.S. Treasury Note 1.500% 189,410,800         162,227,392
Due February 15, 2030
U.S. Treasury Note 1.375% 154,620,000         145,819,948
Due January 31, 2025
U.S. Treasury Note 2.250% 197,500,000         144,290,723
Due August 15, 2046
U.S. Treasury Note 0.500% 154,000,000         142,450,000
Due March 31, 2025
A complete list of portfolio holdings may be requested from the Oregon State Treasury,
350 Winter Street NE, Suite 100, Salem, OR  97301-3896.
Largest Stock Holdings (by Fair Value)
June 30, 2023
Largest Bond Holdings (by Fair Value)
June 30, 2023
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 127
Schedule of Fees and Commissions
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Assets Under
Management Fees
Investment Managers' Fees:
Debt Securities Managers 19,782,459,269$    18,826,985$           0.0952 %
Public Equity Managers 23,026,133,653 50,860,940 0.2209
Real Estate Managers 13,481,577,315 104,370,474 0.7742
Private Equity Managers 26,188,039,823 289,707,631 1.1063
Real Assets Managers 8,980,367,543 104,147,243 1.1597
Diversifying Strategies Managers 4,918,880,547 50,398,037 1.0246
Opportunity Portfolio Managers 2,449,303,169 28,633,134 1.1690
Total Assets Under Management 98,826,761,319$
Other Investment Service Fees:
Investment Consultants 12,762,315
Commissions and Other Fees 536,598,492
Total Investment Service and Managers' Fees $1,196,305,251
Schedule of Broker Commissions
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Number of Commission
Broker's Name   Commission   Shares Traded per Share
Goldman Sachs 2,127,647$             189,310,515           0.0112$
Instinet 976,081 565,748,491           0.0017
Morgan Stanley 752,190 210,721,523           0.0036
J.P. Morgan Securities 423,470 272,074,346           0.0016
UBS 400,017 119,468,852           0.0033
BofA Securities, Inc. 345,741 34,298,392             0.0101
Citigroup Global Markets Inc. 292,271 224,812,770           0.0013
Barclays Capital 249,821 98,383,876             0.0025
Jefferies 216,180 71,095,711             0.0030
Jones Trading Institutional Services LLC 139,531 7,084,327               0.0197
Merrill Lynch 116,360 65,382,873             0.0018
Citibank 115,126 53,870,912             0.0021
Virtu 109,955 23,815,454             0.0046
Pershing Securities 101,649 13,061,004             0.0078
HSBC 98,214 103,061,045           0.0010
Royal Bank of Canada 97,970 6,841,461               0.0143
Société Générale 85,614 45,734,628             0.0019
Credit Lyonnais Securities 82,100 176,947,661           0.0005
Cowen and Company, LLC 80,607 5,296,301               0.0152
Macquarie Capital Securities 77,169 102,971,394           0.0007
Brokerage commissions on purchases and sales are too numerous to list; therefore, only the top 20 brokers by
amount of commission paid are shown.
Percentage
128 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Investment Summary
Fair Value as of
Type of Investment June 30, 2023
Debt Securities
U.S. Government Securities 8,483,288,262$    8.58 %
U.
S. Agency Securities 2,334,774,703      2.36
International Debt Securities 1,107,925,547      1.12
Non-U.S. Government Debt Securities 1,188,250,728      1.20
Corporate Bonds 1,830,329,917      1.85
Bank Loans 1,279,434,469      1.30
Municipal Bonds 38,810,930           0.04
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 555,351,144         0.56
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities 89,634,975           0.09
Asset-Backed Securities 529,215,498         0.54
Guaranteed Investment Contracts2 310,740,706         0.31
Domestic Fixed Income Funds 965,472,827         0.98
Global Fixed Income Funds 881,229,563         0.89
Rep
urchase Agreements 188,000,000         0.19
Total Debt Securities 19,782,459,269    20.01
Public Equity
Derivatives in Asset Positions 87,004,722           0.09
Domestic Equity Securities 10,737,408,507    10.86
International Equity Securities 6,215,692,031      6.29
Domestic Equity Funds 3,511,250,074      3.55
Global Equity Funds 712,375,479         0.72
International Equity Funds 840,431,576         0.85
Target Date Funds 877,200,620         0.89
Oregon Savings Growth Plan - Self Directed 44,770,644           0.05
Total Public Equity 23,026,133,653    23.30
Real Estate 13,481,577,315    13.64
Private Equity 26,188,039,823    26.50
Real Assets 8,980,367,543      9.09
Diversifying Strategies 4,918,880,547      4.98
Opportunity Portfolio 2,449,303,169      2.48
Total Fair Value 98,826,761,319$  100.00 %
1 These percentages do not include cash and cash equivalents.
2 Guaranteed Investment Contracts are stated at contract value.
Percent of
Total Fair Value1
Actuarial
Section
130 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 131
Milliman
December 1, 2023
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Re: Actuarial Valuation as of December 31, 2022
Dear Members of the Board,
1455 SW Broadway
Suite 1600
Portland, OR 97201
USA
Tel +1 503 227 0634
milliman.com
As part of our engagement with the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System ("PERS" or
"the System"), we performed an actuarial valuation of PERS as of December 31, 2022. Our
findings will be detailed in the forthcoming system-wide December 31 , 2022 Actuarial Valuation
report. Previously , we published a system-wide December 31, 2021 Actuarial Valuation report ,
which was issued September 19, 2022. The December 31 , 2022 Actuarial Valuation reflects the
benefit provisions of the system in effect as of the valuation date. The December 31, 2021
report reflected the benefit provisions of the system in effect as of the valuation date as well as
Senate Bill 111 and House Bill 2906, which were signed into law in June 2021.
Both the December 31 , 2022 Actuarial Valuation and the December 31 , 2021 Actuarial
Valuation are used to develop information provided in the Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report (ACFR) for Oregon PERS. The December 31 , 2022 Actuarial Valuation forms the basis
for the Actuarial Section of the ACFR. The December 31 , 2021 Actuarial Valuation is used to
develop the financial reporting results required by Governmental Accounting Standards Board
(GASB) Statement No. 67 for the Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP programs and by GASB
Statement No. 74 for the RHIA and RHIPA programs.
Actuarial Section of the ACFR
The material included in the Actuarial Section of the ACFR for Oregon PERS is a subset of the
results contained in the December 31, 2022 Actuarial Valuation. The descriptions in that report
regarding the actuarial basis of the valuation and the material inputs and limitations of use of the
valuation apply to the ACFR exhibits and are incorporated herein by reference.
Actuarial valuations are performed annually , but only "rate-setting" valuations performed as of
the end of each odd-numbered year are used to set actuarially determined biennial contribution
rates. Those rates are then considered for adoption by the Public Employees Retirement Board
("PERB"). Interim valuations performed as of the end of each even -numbered year are only
advisory in nature, and contribution rates developed in those valuations are not presented to the
PERB for adoption .
The PERB has sole authority to determine the actuarial assumptions and methods used for the
valuation. The actuarial assumptions and methods used in the December 31, 2022 actuar ial
valuation were adopted by the PERB based upon the results of the 2022 Experience Study
conducted by Milliman , issued July 24, 2023. The actuarial assumptions and methods used in
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
132 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
December 1, 2023
the December 31 , 2021 actuarial valuation were adopted by the PERB based upon the results
of the 2020 Experience Study conducted by Milliman, issued July 20, 2021. The assumptions
and methods, including those used for funding purposes, were selected in a manner consistent
with current Actuarial Standards of Practice .
Milliman prepared the following information that is presented in the Actuarial Section of the 2023
ACFR based on the December 31, 2022 Actuarial Valuation:
• Schedule of Active Member Valuation Data
• Schedule of Retirees and Beneficiaries Added to and Removed from Rolls
• Schedules of Funding Progress by Rate Pool
• Solvency Test
• Analysis of Financial Experience
• Schedules of Funding Progress
We understand the Actuarial Section of the ACFR will also include summaries of the actuarial
methods , actuarial assumptions , and plan provisions valued. These summaries are contained in
the December 31 , 2022 Actuarial Valuation.
Financial Reporting Under GASB 67 and GASB 74
Under GASB 67 and GASB 74, the required financial reporting schedules present information
using a Measurement Date of the System's fiscal year end. The Total Pension Liability (under
GASB 67) and Total OPEB Liability (under GASB 74) for the June 30, 2023 fiscal year end were
determined based on the results of the December 31 , 2021 Actuarial Valuation. The liability
calculated at the actuarial valuation date was then adjusted to the Measurement Date using
standard actuarial roll-forward procedures . The Total Pension Liability/Total OPEB Liability is
compared to the Fiduciary Net Position as of the Measurement Date, as provided by PERS and
measured on a fair market value of assets basis, to determine the Net Pension Liability (Asset)
under GASB 67 and the Net OPEB Liability (Asset) under GASB 7 4.
Milliman prepared the following exhibits for GASB 67 to assist PERS in complet ing the required
Notes to the Financial Statements and Required Supplementary Information :
• Net Pension Liability (Asset)
• Changes in Net Pension Liability (Asset)
• Sensitivity Analysis
• Schedule of Changes in Net Pension Liability (Asset) and Related Ratios
• Long Term Expected Rate of Return
These exhibits, along with a discussion of the actuarial basis underlying the results, are
presented in our GASB 67 Reporting for Fiscal Year End 2023 letter dated November 17, 2023.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 133
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
December 1, 2023
Milliman prepared the following exhibits for GASB 74 to assist PERS in complet ing the required
Notes to the Financial Statements and Required Supplementary Information:
• Net OPEB Liability (Asset)
• Changes in Net OPEB Liability (Asset )
• Sensitivity Analysis
• Schedule of Changes in Net OPEB Liability (Asset) and Related Ratios
• Long Term Expected Rate of Return
These exhibits, along with a discussion of the actuarial basis underlying the results, are
presented in our GASB 7 4 Reporting for Fiscal Year End 2023 letter dated November 17, 2023.
The first four exhibits listed above were provided separately for RHIA and RHIPA.
Funding Policy
The funding policy selected by the PERB is to adopt biennial contribution rates in accordance
with the results of a "rate-setting" actuarial valuation performed using the assumptions and
methods described in the associated actuarial valuation report. For example, the rates
developed in the December 31 , 2021 Actuarial Valuat ion were adopted by the PERB and
established employer contributions for the July 1, 2023 to June 30, 2025 biennium. Contribut ion
rates include funding the cost associated with new benefit accruals as well as amortizing any
unfunded actuarial liability, determined using the market value of assets, over closed, layered
amortization periods that vary from 10 to 20 years, according to the benefit program. In
accordance with Senate Bill 1049, the unfunded actuarial liability for Tier One/Tier Two was
reamortized over 22 years as of December 31 , 2019. The contribution rate stabilization method
(also known as the "rate collar'') limits rate changes from one biennium to the next, in effect
phasing in changes over multiple rate-setting periods if asset or liability experience causes a
large movement in the actuariall y calculated contribution rate prior to applicatio n of the rate
collar.
All members hired prior to August 29, 2003, are covered under Chapter 238 and are collectively
referred to as Tier One/Tier Two members. Their benefit costs are calculated using two
experience sharing pool valuations and some independent employer valuations . All school
districts pool their Tier One/Tier Two experience through the school district pool. State
government and some local governments pool their Tier One/Tier Two experience through the
State and Local Government Rate Pool (SLGRP). As of December 31 , 2022, there are also 124
independent employers who do not pool their Tier One/Tier Two experience with the other
employers except through the Benefits in Force Reserve, which pools the experience of Tier
One/Tier Two members in payee status across all employers and all other Tier One/Tier Two
pooling arrangements .
All members hired after August 28, 2003, are covered under Chapter 238A and are referred to
as OPS RP members , except for those members who previously established membersh ip under
Chapter 238 and meet the statutory requirements to reinstate those benefits. Experience for
Chapter 238A members is pooled across all employers regardless of their status under the
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
134 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
December 1, 2023
Page4
Chapter 238 arrangements . Chapter 238 benefits and Chapter 238A benefits are parts of a
single plan.
Finally, some employers made lump sum deposits in addition to their regularly scheduled
contributions. These deposits are placed in a "side account" within the legally restricted pension
trust and are used to offset a portion of future contribution requirements of the depositing
employers via side account transfers . For financial reporting purposes , lump sum deposits are
not considered as contributions in relation to the actuarially determined contribution . However ,
side accounts are included as assets in the Fiduciary Net Position. The Schedule of Funding
Progress and Solvency Test also include side accounts as part of the Plan's assets.
Actuarial Basis
Some of the actuarial computations presented in the valuation reports are for purposes of
determining contribution rates for System employers. Other actuarial computations presented in
the reports under GASB Statements No. 67, 68, 74, and 75 are for purposes of assisting the
System and participating employers in fulfilling their financial reporting requirements . The
computations prepared for these two purposes may differ as disclosed in our reports . The
calculations in the reports have been made on a basis consistent with our understanding of the
System 's funding policy and goals, the System benefit provisions as summarized in the reports,
and GASB Statements No. 67, 68, 74, and 75. Determinations for purposes other than meeting
these requirements may be significantly different from the results contained in these reports .
Accordingly , additional determinations may be needed for other purposes.
Actuarial assumptions , including discount rates, mortality tables , and others identified in this
report, and actuarial cost methods are adopted by the Board. The Board is responsible for
selecting the System's funding policy, actuarial valuation methods , asset valuation methods,
and assumptions . The policies, methods , and assumptions used in the valuation are those that
have been so adopted and are described in the reports. All costs, liabilities, rates of interest,
and other factors for the System have been determined on the basis of actuarial assumptions
and methods which, in our professional opinion, are individually reasonable (taking into account
the experience of the System and reasonable expectations) ; and which, in combination, ofter a
reasonable estimate of anticipated experience affecting the System and are expected to have
no significant bias. In our professional opinion, the assumptions and method selected by the
Board for funding purposes follow the guidance under relevant actuarial standards of practice.
The valuation reports are only an estimate of the System 's financial condition as of a single
date. They can neither predict the System's future condition nor guarantee future financial
soundness . Actuarial valuations do not affect the ultimate cost of System benefits , only the
timing of the System 's actuarially calculated contributions . While the valuations are based on an
array of individually reasonable assumptions , other assumption sets may also be reasonable
and valuation results based on those assumptions would be different. No one set of
assumptions is uniquely correct.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 135
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
December 1, 2023
Future actuarial measurements may differ significantly from the current measurements
presented in these reports due to such factors as, but not limited to, the following : System
experience differing from that anticipated by the economic or demographic assumptions ;
changes in economic or demographic assumptions ; increases or decreases expected as part of
the natural operation of the methodology used for these measurements (such as the end of an
amortization period or modifications to contribution calculations based on the System's funded
status); and changes in System benefit provisions or applicable law. Due to the limited scope of
this assignment , we did not perform an analysis of the potential range of future measurements.
The PERB has the final decision regarding the appropriateness of the assumptions and adopted
them as indicated herein at the October 2021 and September 2023 public Board meetings.
In preparing the valuation reports, we relied, without audit, on information (some oral and some
in writing) supplied by the System 's staff. This information includes , but is not limited to, System
benefit provisions as defined by statute, member census data, and financial information. We
found this information to be reasonably consistent and comparable with information used for
other purposes. The valuation results depend on the integrity of this information . If any of this
information is inaccurate or incomplete our results may be different and our calculations may
need to be revised.
Milliman's work has been prepared exclusively for the Oregon Public Employees Retirement
System for a specific and limited purpose. Milliman does not intend to benefit or create a legal
duty to any third-party recipient of this work. It is a complex, technical analysis that assumes a
high level of knowledge concerning the System's operations, and uses the System's data, which
Milliman has not audited. No third-party recipient of Milliman's work product should rely upon
Milliman's work product. Such recipients should engage qualified professionals for advice
appropriate to their own specific needs.
The valuation results were developed using models that employ standard actuarial techniques
for pension valuations . We have reviewed the models, including their inputs , calculations, and
outputs, for consistency , reasonableness , and appropriateness to the intended purpose and in
compliance with generally accepted actuarial practice and relevant actuarial standards of
practice. Results were rolled forward from the valuation date to the measurement date for GASB
67 and 74 results using the assumptions and methods described in the relevant letters.
The consultants who worked on this assignment are actuaries . Milliman's advice is not intended
to be a substitute for qualified legal or accounting counsel.
The signing actuaries are independent of the plan sponsor. We are not aware of any
relationship that would impair the objectivity of our work.
On the basis of the foregoing, we hereby certify that , to the best of our knowledge and belief,
this report is complete and accurate and has been prepared in accordance with generally
recognized and accepted actuarial principles and practices which are consistent with the
principles prescribed by the Actuarial Standards Board and the Code of Professional Conduct
and Qualification Standards for Actuaries Issuing Statements of Actuarial Opinion in the United
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
136 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Public Employees Retirement Board
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
December 1, 2023
States published by the American Academy of Actuaries . We are members of the American
Academy of Actuaries and meet the Qualification Standards to render the actuarial opinion
contained herein.
Sincerely ,
~
Matthew R. Larrabee, FSA, EA, MAAA
Principal and Consulting Actuary
Scott D. Preppernau , F A , EA, MAAA
Principal and Consulting Actuary
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Milliman work product.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 137
Milliman Actuarial Valuation
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewin g the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
138 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Actuarial Methods and Valuation Procedures
In September 2023 the Board adopted the following actuarial methods and valuation procedu res for the
December 31, 2022 and 2023 actuarial valuations of PERS Tier One/Tier Two benefits.
Actuarial cost method
Milliman
Entry Age Nonnal. Under the Entry Age Normal (EAN) cost method, each active
member's entry age present value of projected benefits is allocated over the
member's seNice from the member 's date of entry until their assumed date of exit,
taking into consideration expected future compensation increases . Thus , the total
pension to which each member is expected to become entitled at retirement is
broken down into units, each associated with a year of past or projected future
credited seNice. Typically, when this method is introduced , there will be an initial
liability for benefits credited for seNice prior to that date, and to the extent that the
liability is not covered by assets of the plan, there is an unfunded accrued liability to
be funded over a stipulated period in accordance with an amortization schedule.
A detailed description of the calculation follows :
An individual member 's entry age present value of projected benefits is the sum
of the present value of the benefit described under the plan at each possible
separation date, determined at the member's entry age using the projected
compensation and seNice at each separation date.
An individual member 's entry age present value of projected salaries is the sum
of the present value of the projected compensation over the member's work ing
career associated with each possible future separation date, determ ined at the
member's entry age.
An individual member 's present value of projected benefits is the sum of the
present value of the benefit described under the plan at each possible separation
date, determined at the valuation date using the projected compensation and
seNice at each separation date.
An individual member's normal cost for a certain year is the member's entry age
present value of projected benefits divided by the member's entry age
present value of projected salaries and multiplied by the member's projected
compensation for the year follow ing the valuation date.
An individual member 's actuarial accrued liability is the member's present value
of projected benefits less the sum of the present value of the member's
normal costs for each future year, determined at the valuation date using the
projected compensation and seNice at each future year.
- The plan's nonnal cost is the sum of the individual member normal costs,
and the plan's actuarial accrued liability is the sum of the individual
members' actuarial accrued liabilities.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 139
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Tier One/Tier Two UAL The Tier One/Tier Two UAL amortization period was reset to 20 years as of
amortization December 31 , 2013. Gains and losses between subsequent odd-year valuatio ns
were amortized as a level percentage of projected combined valuation payroll (Tier
One/Tier Two plus OPSRP payroll) over a closed 20-year period from the valuation
in which they are first recognized .
Senate Bill 1049 was signed into law in June 2019 and required a one-tim e re­
amortization of Tier One/Tier Two UAL over a closed 22-year period at the
December 31, 2019 rate-setting actuarial valuation, which set actuarially
determined contribution rates for the 2021-2023 biennium. Future Tier One/Tier
Two UAL gains or losses will be amortized over 20 years . The closed period
amortization under Senate Bill 1049 will continue to decline and has 20 years
remaining as of the December 31 , 2022 rate-setting valuation.
Retiree Healthcare UAL
amortization
The UAL for the Retiree Healthcare programs (RHIA and RHIPA ) as of December
31, 2007 were amortized as a level percentage of projected comb ined valuation
payroll (Tier One/Tier Two plus OPSRP payroll) over a closed 10-year period.
When RHIA or RHIPA are less than 100% funded , gains and losses between
subsequent odd-year valuations are amortized as a level percentage of combined
valuation payroll over a closed 10-year period from the valuation in which they are
first recognized.
If RHIA or RHIPA are in actuarial surplus (over 100% funded) , the surplus is
amortized over a rolling 20-year period over Tier OnefTier Two payroll. The
resulting negative UAL rate will offset the normal cost of the program , but not below
0.00%.
Asset valuation method The actuarial value of assets equals the market value of assets, excluding the
Contingency and Capital Preservation Reserves , and the Rate Guarantee Reserve
when it is in positive surplus status.
Milliman
Market values are reported to Milliman by PERS. It is our understanding that select
real estate and private equity investments are reported on a three-month lag basis.
This valuation report does not attempt to quantify any effects of the reporting lag.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
140 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Contribution rate The UAL Rate component for a rate pool (e.g., Tier One/Tier Two SLGRP, Tier
stabilization method One/Tier Two School Districts, OPSRP) is confined to a collared range based on
the prior biennium's collared UAL Rate component (prior to consideration of side
account offsets, SLGRP transition liability or surplus rates, pre-SLGRP liability rate
charges or offsets, or member redirect offsets).
Offset for Member
Redirect Contributions
Collar Width: The rate pool's new UAL Rate component will generally not increase
or decrease from the prior biennium's collared UAL Rate component by more than
the following amount:
• Tier One/Tier Two SLGRP and Tier One/Tier Two School Districts Pool:
3% of payroll
• OPS RP: 1 % of payroll
• Tier One/Tier Two rates for independent employers: greater of 4% of
payroll or one-third of the difference between the collared and uncollared
UAL Rate at the prior rate-setting valuation. In addition, the UAL Rate will
not be allowed to be less than 0.00% of payroll for any Tier One/Tier Two
independent employer with a funded status (excluding side accounts) less
than 100%.
UAL Rate decrease restrictions: The UAL Rate component for any rate pool will not
decrease from the prior biennium's collared UAL Rate component if the pool's
funded status (excluding side accounts) is 87% or lower; the allowable decrease
will phase into the full collar width for rate pools between 87% and 90% funded.
Under Senate Bill 1049, a portion of the 6% of pay member contribution otherwise
made to the IAP is redirected to fund Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP defined
benefits beginning July 1, 2020. For Tier One/Tier Two members, the redirected
amount is 2.50% of pay, and for OPSRP it is 0.75% of pay. Members with less than
$2,500 in monthly pay (indexed in future years) are exempt from the redirection.
House Bill 2906 subsequently increased this amount to $3,333 per month effective
in 2022.
For employer contribution rates shown in this valuation, member redirect
contributions are assumed to offset total contribution rates. Reflecting the effect of
the monthly pay level-based exemption noted above, the offset is assumed to be
2.40% of total payroll for Tier One/Tier Two and 0.65% of total payroll for OPS RP.
Allocation of Liability for
Service Segments
For active Tier One/Tier Two members who have worked for multiple PERS
employers over their career, the calculated actuarial accrued liability is allocated
among the employers based on a weighted average of the Money Match
methodology, which uses account balance, and the Full Formula methodology,
which uses service. The allocation is 5% (0% for police & fire) based on account
balance with each employer and 95% (100% for police & fire) based on service
with each employer.
Allocation of Benefits­
In-Force (BIF) Reserve
Milliman
The entire normal cost is allocated to the current employer.
The BIF reserve is allocated to each rate pool in proportion to the retiree liability
attributable to the rate pool.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 141
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Census Data PERS staff provided the data on plan members and beneficiaries upon which this
valuation is based. Milliman did not audit the data but did review it for
reasonableness and consistency with data provided for previous years, in
accordance with Actuarial Standard of Practice No. 23.
PERS staff assisted in resolving questions and inconsistencies discovered in the
data review and provided updated records or direction for adjusting data as
needed.
The final census data is expected to be sufficiently accurate and complete for
purposes of the actuarial valuation, and we are not aware of any significant
concerns or unresolved issues that would materially affect results.
Internal Revenue Code
415 Benefit Limits
Annual benefit limits under Internal Revenue Code 415 are not explicitly reflected in
the valuation.
Milliman
In accordance with ORS 238.488, we understand that members whose benefits
are restricted by IRC 415 benefit limits are paid the difference between the
unrestricted benefit and the IRC 415-restricted benefit from the Public Employee
Benefit Equalization Fund.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
142 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Economic Assumptions
The Board adopted the following economic assumptions for the December 31, 2022 and 2023 actuarial
valuations. All assumptions were reviewed and adopted in conjunction with the 2022 Experience Study,
published in July 2023. The assumption selection process and rationale is described in detail in that report.
Investment return
Pre-2014 Interest
crediting
Post-2013 Interest
crediting
Inflation
Administrative
expenses
Payroll growth
Healthcare cost trend
Milliman
6.90% compounded annually
8.00% compounded annually on members' regular account balances
8.25% compounded annually on members' variable account balances
6.90% compounded annually on members' regular account balances
6.90% compounded annually on members' variable account balances
2.40% compounded annually
$64.0 million per year is added to the total system normal cost and
allocated between Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP based on valuation
payroll.
3.40% compounded annually. This assumption represents the sum of the
inflation assumption and a real wage growth assumption of 100 basis points.
Healthcare cost trend rates are used to estimate increases in the RHIPA
Maximum Subsidy . The healthcare cost trends are based on the Society of
Actuaries (SOA) periodically updated report on long-term medical trends.
That report includes detailed research performed by a committee of
economists and actuaries (including a Milliman representative ) utilizing the
"Getzen Model" named after the professor who developed the model. We
believe that the research and the model are fundamentally and technically
sound and advance the body of knowledge available to actuaries to project
long-term medical trends more accurately. Milliman uses the Getzen Model
as the foundation for the trend that we recommend to our clients for OPEB
valuations . The model produces long-range trend assumptions built on
long-term relationships between certain key economic factors.
Year* I Rate I Year I Rate
2023 6.60% 2031 4.40%
2024 7.00% 2032-2054 4.20%
2025 6.40% 2055-2064 4.30%
2026 5.70% 2065-2066 4.20%
2027 5.10% 2067-2068 4.10%
2028 4.90% 2069-2070 4.00%
2029 4.80% 2071-2073 3.90%
2030 4.60% 2074+ 3.80%
• For valuation purposes , the health cost trend rates are assumed lo be applied at the beginning
of the plan year.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 143
Milliman Actuarial Valuation
Demographic Assumptions
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
The Board adopted the following demographic assumptions for the December 31 , 2022 and 2023 actuarial
valuations . All assumptions were reviewed and adopted in conjunction with the 2022 Experience Study,
published in July 2023. The study relied on data from an observation period of January 1, 2017 to
December 31, 2022, with the exception of the merit scale assumption , which relied on data from 2012 through
2022 (with certain exclusions due to one-off events that are not expected to be indicative of future experience ,
as detailed in the 2022 Experience Study). Assumptions selected from the study represent an estimate of
future experience based on relevant recent experience and reasonable expectat ions about the future.
Mortality
Healthy Retired Members and Beneficiaries
The following healthy annuitant mortality tables were first adopted in the December 31 valuation of the years
shown.
Generational Projection with Unisex Year
I
Pub-2010 Healthy Retiree, Sex Distinct, Valuation
Basic Table Social Security Data Scale Adopted
School District male
Other General Service male*
Police & Fire male
School District female
Blend 80% Teachers and 20% General
Employees , no set back
General Employees, set back 12 months
Public Safety, no set back
Teachers, no set back
Other General Service female ** General Employees, no set back
Police & Fire female Public Safety, set back 12 months
• including male beneficiaries of members of all classes
•• including female beneficiaries of members of all classes
Disabled Retired Members
2020
2018
2018
2018
2018
2018
The following disabled retiree mortality rates were first adopted for the December 31 , 2018 actuarial valuation .
Pub-2010 Disabled Retiree, Sex Distinct, Generational
Basic Table Projection with Unisex Social Security Data Scale
Police & Fire male
Other General Service male
Police & Fire female
Blended 50% Public Safety, 50% Non-Safety , no set back
Non-Safety, set forward 24 months
Blended 50% Public Safety, 50% Non-Safety , no set back
other General Service female Non-Safety, set forward 12 months
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
144 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Non-Annuitant Members
The following non-annuitant mortality tables were first adopted in the December 31 valuation of the years
shown.
Pub-2010 Employee, Sex Distinct, Generational
Basic Table Projection with Unisex Social Security Data Scale
School District male
Other General Service male
Police & Fire male
School District female
Other General Service female
Police & Fire female
Retirement Assumptions
125% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
115% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
125% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
100% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
125% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
100% of Employee table with same job category
and set back as Healthy Retiree assumption
The retirement assumptions used in the actuarial valuation include the following:
Retirement from active status/dormant status
Probability a member will elect a lump sum option at retirement
Percentage of members who elect to purchase credited service at retirement.
Rates of Retirement from Active Status
2020
2018
2022
2018
2018
2018
The following retirement rate assumptions were first adopted in the December 31 , 2022 valuation .
Less than 50 15.0% 25.0% --------- -- ------- ---------- -------- --
50 1.5% 3.5% 38.0% 15.0% 25.0%
51 1.5% 3.5% 28.0% 15.0% 25.0%
52 1.5% 3.5% 28.0% 15.0% 25.0%
53 1.5% 3.5% 28.0% 15.0% 32.0%
54 1.5% 3.5% 28.0% 15.0% 25.0% --------------------
55 3.0% 20.0% 28.0% 1.5% 2.5% 15.0% 1.5% 3.5% 25.0%
56 3.0% 12.0% 28.0% 1.5% 2.5% 15.0% 1.5% 3.5% 25.0%
57 3.0% 12.0% 28.0% 1.5% 2.5% 15.0% 1.5% 3.5% 25.0%
58 6.0% 12.0% 28.0% 1.5% 8.0% 21.0% 1.5% 11.0% 27.5%
59 6.0% 12.0% 28.0% 3.5% 8.0% 21.0% 4.5% 11.0% 27.5% -------- --------------------- -------------------
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
Milliman to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 145
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
60 6.0% 13.0% 32.0% 6.0% 12.0% 21.0% 6.5% 14.5% 27.5% 15.0%
61 6.0% 14.0% 28.0% 6.0% 11.0% 21 .0% 6.5% 14.5% 27.5% 15.0%
62 15.0% 25.0% 38.0% 13.0% 18.5% 28.5% 1 5.0% 21.0% 34.0% 15.0%
63 15.0% 15.0% 31 .0% 11.5% 16.5% 23.0% 13.0% 19.5% 29.0% 15.0%
64 15.0% 15.0% 31.0% 12.5% 16.5% 23.0% 13.0% 19.5% 29.0% 15.0% ---- --------------------
65 40.0% 40.0% 45.0% 19.5% 28.0% 37.5% 25.5% 34.5% 45.0% 15.0%
66 40.0% 40.0% 45.0% 27.5% 36.0% 40.5% 23.0% 36.5% 45.0% 15.0%
67 40.0% 40.0% 45.0% 22.5% 26.5% 34.0% 21 .0% 34.5% 38.0% 20.0%
68 40.0% 40.0% 45.0% 19.5% 26.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 20.0%
69 40.0% 40.0% 45.0% 19.5% 26.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 20.0% ----------- ------- ------------------------------
70 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 25.0% 28.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 30.0%
71 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 25.0% 28.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 30.0%
72 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 25.0% 28.5% 28.5% 21.0% 30.0% 28.5% 30.0%
73 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 25.0% 28.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 30.0%
74 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 25.0% 28.5% 28.5% 21 .0% 30.0% 28.5% 30.0% ---------- ------- ----- ---- ------ ------------------
75 + 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Retirement from Dormant Status
Dormant members are assumed to retire at Normal Retirement Age (age 58 for Tier One, age 60 for Tier
Two, age 60 for Judges, and age 55 for Police & Fire) or at the first unreduced retirement age (30 years of
service, or age 50 with 25 years of service for Police & Fire).
Lump Sum Option at Retirement
Members retiring may elect to receive a full or partial lump sum at retirement. The probability that a retiring
member will elect a lump sum at retirement is summarized in the table below. Due to a continued decline in
the number of members selecting either a total or partial lump sum, both assumptions are now zero. The zero
assumption was first adopted for total lump sums effective December 31 , 2020 and for partial lump sums
effective December 31 , 2022.
Milliman
Lump Sum Option at Retirement
Partial Lump Sum: 0.0% for all years
Total Lump Sum: 0.0% for all years
No Lump Sum: 100.0% for all years
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
146 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Purchase of Credited Service at Retirement
The following percentages of members are assumed to purchase service credit at time of retirement for the
six-month waiting period that occurs prior to establishing membership in the system. These rates were first
adopted effective December 31, 2020.
Purchase of Credited Service at Retirement
Money Match Retirements: 0%
Non-Money Match Retirements: 75%
The cost of the service purchase is estimated based on assumed salary and contribution rates at entry age.
State Judiciary Member Plan Election
All State Judiciary members are assumed to elect to retire under the provisions of Plan B.
Disability Assumptions
There are two disability assumptions used in the valuation - duty disability and ordinary (non-duty) disability.
Duty disability rates are separated between Police & Fire and General Service, while ordinary disability is the
same for all members. All rates were first adopted effective December 31 , 2022.
Duty Disability Police & Fire
Duty Disability General Service
Ordinary Disability
Percentage of the 1985
Disability Class 1 Rates
25%
0.6%
20% with 0.14% cap
Ordinary disability rates are not applied until the minimum service requirement for non-duty disability benefits
is met. Disability rates continue to be applied after retirement eligibil ity, but not after Normal Retirement Age.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 147
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Termination Assumptions
The General Service Female termination assumption was first adopted effective December 31 , 2020. The
General Service Male termination assumption was first adopted effective December 31 , 2018. The School
District Male termination assumption was first adopted effective December 31, 2016. The School District
Female termination assumption was first adopted effective December 31 , 2022. The Police & Fire termination
assumption was first adopted effective December 31, 2022.
Sample termination rates are shown for each group below:
I . " I " I
• I . Police & Fire
0 16.63% 13.50%
14.25% 13.00%
5 6.86% 7.91%
10 3.31% 4.43%
15 2.30% 3.17%
20 1.62% 2.43%
25 1.20% 1.75%
30+ 1.20% 1.75%
15.00%
12.50%
7.19%
4.13%
2.93%
2.08%
1.47%
1.40%
15.00%
14.00%
7.23%
4.77%
3.43%
2.47%
1.78%
1.40%
10.00%
7.00%
4.32%
2.87%
1.90%
1.26%
0.90%
0.90%
Termination rates are not applied after a member reaches retirement eligibility. For a complete table of rates,
please refer to the 2022 Experience Study report for the System, published in July 2023.
Oregon Residency Post-Retirement
For purposes of determining eligibility for SB 656/HB 3349 benefit adjustments, 85% of retirees are assumed
to remain Oregon residents after retirement. This assumption was first adopted effective December 31 , 2012.
Police & Fire Unit Purchase
Police & Fire members retiring from active service prior to age 65 are assumed to purchase additional benefit
units at an estimated employer matching cost of $4,000.
Salary Increase Assumptions
The salary increase assumptions reflected in the actuarial valuation include:
Merit scale increases in addition to the payroll growth increase
Unused Sick Leave adjustments
Vacation Pay adjustments
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
148 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Merit Scale Increases
Merit scale increases are based on duration of service for the following groups with sample rates shown in the
following table. These rates were first adopted effective December 31 , 2022.
Other General
School District Service ..
0 5.54% 4.77% 6.12%
5.23% 4.39% 5.46%
5 4.02% 3.10% 3.38%
10 2.66% 1.93% 1.91%
15 1.53% 1.17% 1.30%
20 0.68% 0.73% 1.18%
25 0.17% 0.50% 1.15%
30+ 0.06% 0.38% 0.80%
In addition to the merit scale increases shown above, an addition 2% annual merit salary increase assumption
applies to salary increases from 2023 to 2024 and from 2024 to 2025.
The assumed merit scale increase for active State Judiciary members is 0.0%.
For a complete table of rates, please refer to the 2022 Experience Study for the System, published in July 2023.
Unused Sick Leave
Members covered by the provision allowing unused sick leave to be used to increase final average salary at
time of retirement are assumed to receive increases in their final average salary in accordance with the table
below. This adjustment is not applied to disability benefits. Effective dates for the current assumption are
shown in the table.
Milliman
Valuation
Unused Sick Leave year adopted
Actives
• State General Service Male 8.75% 2022
• State General Service Female 5.25% 2022
• School District Male 9.75% 2022
• School District Female 6.50% 2020
• Local General Service Male 6.50% 2022
• Local General Service Female 4.50% 2020
• State Police & Fire 4.75% 2022
• Local Police & Fire 7.25% 2022
Dormant Members 5.00% 2020
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 149
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Vacation Pay
Members eligible to include a lump sum payment of unused vacation pay in their final average salary
calculation at time of retirement are assumed to receive increases in their final average salary in accordance
with the table below. This adjustment is not applied to disability benefits. These state general service and
local general services rates were adopted December 31, 2020. The school district assumption was adopted
effective December 31, 2012. The state police & fire assumption and local police & fire assumptions were
adopted effective December 31, 2022.
Tier One
• State General Service
• School District
• Local General Service
• State Police & Fire
• Local Police & Fire
Tier Two
Vacation Pay
2.50%
0.25%
3.50%
3.00%
4.25%
0.00%
Retiree Healthcare Participation
The following percentages of eligible retiring members are assumed to elect RHIPA and RHIA coverage:
Retiree Healthcare Participation
RH/PA
• 8 - 9 years of service
• 1 0 - 14 years of service
• 15 - 19 years of service
• 20 - 24 years of service
• 25 - 29 years of service
• 30+ years of service
RH/A
• Healthy Retired
• Disabled Retired
10.0%
10.0%
11.0%
12.0%
20.0%
25.0%
25.0%
15.0%
The participations rates were adopted December 31, 2022.
Spouse Assumptions
Non-annuitant death benefits are valued assuming all members are married. Future participants in RHIA and
RHIPA are assumed to have eligible spouses. For these purposes, the spouse is assumed to be three years
younger than a male member or three years older than a female member.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
150 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Tier One/Tier Two (including Retiree Healthcare)
Actuarial Equivalence Assumptions
Early retirement factors and optional form conversion factors are assumed to remain level in all future years.
For members with pop-up annuities , the future amount payable if the spouse predeceases the membe r is
estimated based on an assumed 0.90 optional form conversion factor for 100% contingent annuities and an
assumed 0.94 optional form conversion factor for 50% contingent annuities .
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work . Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 151
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
OPSRP
OPSRP
Most of the methods and assumptions adopted for the OPSRP valuation are the same as those used for Tier
One/Tier Two. The methods and assumptions that differ for OPSRP are summarized below. The Board
adopted the following methods, procedures and assumptions for the December 31, 2022 and December 31,
2023 actuarial valuations .
Actuarial Methods and Valuation Procedures
OPSRP UAL amortization The UAL as of December 31 , 2007 is amortized as a level percentage of
projected combined valuation payroll (Tier One/Tier Two plus OPSRP
payroll) over a closed period 16-year period. Gains and losses between
subsequent odd-year valuations are amortized as a level percentage of
combined valuation payroll over 16 years from the valuation in which they
are first recognized.
Economic Assumptions
Administrative expenses $64.0 million per year is added to the total system normal cost and
allocated between Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP based on valuation
payroll.
Demographic Assumptions
Rates of Retirement from Active Status
50 0.50% 1.50% 5.50%
51 0.50% 1.50% 5.50%
52 0.50% 1.50% 5.50%
53 0.50% 1.50% 28.00%
54 0.50% 1.50% 28.00%
---------- - ----- -- ----------------- ----------------- --- -- --------------- --------
55 2.00% 5.00% 28.00% 1.00% 2.50% 5.00% 0.50% 2.50% 5.00%
56 2.00% 5.00% 28.00% 1.00% 2.50% 5.00% 0.50% 2.50% 5.00%
57 2.00% 5.00% 28.00% 1.00% 2.50% 7.50% 1.00% 2.50% 7.50%
58 5.00% 5.00% 28.00% 1.50% 3.00% 30.00% 1.50% 3.00% 30.00%
59 5.00% 5.00% 28.00% 2.00% 3.00% 25.00% 1.50% 3.00% 25.00%
60 5.00% 15.00% 32.00% 2.50% 3.75% 20.00% 2.50% 3.75% 20.00%
61 5.00% 8.50% 28.00% 2.50% 5.00% 20.00% 2.50% 5.00% 20.00%
62 10.00% 25.00% 38.00% 6.50% 12.00% 30.00% 6.00% 12.00% 30.00%
63 10.00% 15.00% 31.00% 6.50% 10.00% 20.00% 6.00% 10.00% 20.00%
64 10.00% 15.00% 31.00% 6.50% 10.00% 20.00% 6.00% 10.00% 20.00% ---------- -------- -------------- -------------------------------------- ---- --- ----------------- ---------
65 20.00% 35.00% 40.00 % 15.50% 35.00% 20.00% 12.50% 35.00% 20.00%
66 20.00% 35.00% 40.00% 18.50% 33.00% 20.00% 12.50% 33.00% 20.00%
67 20.00% 35.00% 40.00 % 17.00% 22.00% 30.00% 11.00% 22.00% 30.00%
68 20.00% 35.00% 40.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00% 9.00% 20.00% 25.00%
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
Milliman to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
152 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
OPSRP
69 20.00% 35.00% 40.00 % 14.00% 20.00% 25.00% 9.00% ---------- ------ ----------- ---------------- ------------------------------ -- --------------
70 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00%
71 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00%
72 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00%
73 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00%
74 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 14.00% 20.00% 25.00% ---------- ------ ---------- --------------- --------------- ------------- --------------
75 + 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%
Retirement from Dormant Status
Dormant member s are assumed to retire at their Normal Retirement Age.
Disability Assumptions
9.00%
9.00%
9.00%
9.00%
9.00%
-------------
100.00%
20.00% 25.00% ---------------- ---20.00% 25.00%
20.00% 25.00%
20.00% 25.00%
20.00% 25.00%
20.00% 25.00%
-------------- -------------
100.00% 100.00%
Assumed disability rates are not applied to OPS RP members after they reach Normal Retirement Age .
Cost of living increases for the adjusted salary used to calculate retirement benefit s for disabled OPSRP
members are estimated based on the valuati on inflation assumption.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 153
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Changes in Actuarial Methods and Assumptions - Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP
A summary of key changes implemented since the December 31, 2021 valuation are described briefly below.
Changes in Actuarial Methods and Allocation Procedures
• An adjustment was added to the side account amortization calculat ions and Pre-SLGRP liability and
surplus calculations to reflect the delay between when a rate is calculated and when it takes effect.
• The timing of the amortization period for Pre-SLGRP liabilities and surpluses for SLGRP employers
was revised to align the biennial rate-setting cycle.
Changes in Economic Assumptions
• Assumed administrative expenses were updated and changed to a combined assumption of $64
million for Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP .
• The assumed healthcare cost trend rates for the RHIPA program were updated .
Changes in Demographic Assumptions
• The meriUlongevity component assumption of individual member salary increases were updated for
all groups, including adding a select assumption of an additiona l 2% for all members for two years.
• The mortality improvement projection scale applied to all groups is based on 60-year unisex average
mortality improvement rates by age. The assumption was updated to reflect the most recent publicly
available data at the time of the latest experience study . For a complete table of rates, please refer to
the 2022 Experience Study for the System , published in July 2023.
• Termination , disability and retirement rates were updated for some groups to more closely match
observed and anticipated future experience .
• Assumptions for unused sick leave and vacation pay were updated .
• Participation assumptions for both RHIA and RHIPA were updated .
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
154 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewin g the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 155
Milliman Actuarial Valuation
Accounting / ACFR Exhibits
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewin g the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
156 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
The following information as of December 31 , 2022 has been prepared and provided to Oregon PERS for
inclusion in the Actuarial Section of the 2023 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (ACFR):
Schedule of Active Member Valuation Data
Schedule of Retirees and Beneficiaries Added to and Removed from Rolls
Schedules of Funding Progress by Rate Pool
Solvency Test
Analysis of Financial Experience
Schedules of Funding Progress
These exhibits do not reflect GASS Statements No. 67 and 68, issued by GASS in June 2012 to replace
Statements No. 25 and 27. GASS 67 governs plan financia l reporting effective for fiscal years beginning after
June 15, 2013, while GASS 68 governs employer financial reporting for fiscal years beginning after June 15,
2014. Milliman provided results for Oregon PERS under GASS 67 and 68 determined as of a June 30, 2022
measurement date in letters dated November 16, 2022 and January 20, 2023, respectively. The results for a
measurement date of June 30, 2023 will be provided separately.
These exhibits do not reflect GASS Statements No. 74 and 75, which were issued by GASS in June 2015 to
replace Statements No. 43 and 45 and govern financial reporting for postemployment benefits other than
pensions. GASS 7 4 governs plan reporting effective for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2016, while
GASS 75 governs employer reporting for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2017. Milliman provided results
for Oregon PERS under GASS 74 and 75 determined as of a June 30, 2022 measurement date in letters
dated November 16, 2022 and January 20, 2023, respectively . The results for a measurement date of June
30, 2023 will be provided separately.
Some employers have made supplemental deposits in addition to their regularly scheduled contributions .
These deposits are placed in a side account within the pension trust and used to offset future contribution
requirements of that employer. The Schedules of Funding Progress and Solvency Test include side accounts
as part of the Plan's assets since those amounts are in a restricted trust available exclusively for the benefit of
plan members .
Milliman is not an accounting or audit firm and cannot provide accounting advice. Milliman is not responsible
for the interpretation of, or compliance with, accounting standards; citations to, and descript ions of accounting
standards provided in this report are for reference purposes only. The informatio n provided in this section is
intended to assist Oregon PERS in completing its financial statements , but any accounting determination
should be reviewed by your auditor.
The exhibits are provided on the following pages.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement S ystem for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing t he
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 157
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Schedule of Active Member Valuation Data
I I
Annual I I I Number of
Valuation Payroll Average %Increase in Participating
Date Count (Thousands) Annual Pay Average Pay Employers 1
12/31/1993 137,513 $4,466,797 $32,483 N/A
12/31/1995 141,471 $4,848,058 $34,269 5.5% N/A
12/31/1997 143,194 $5,161,562 $36,045 5.2% N/A
12/31/1999 151,262 $5,676,606 $37,528 4.1% N/A
12/31/2000 156,869 $6,195,862 $39,497 5.2% N/A
12/31/2001 -------160,477 _____ ----$6,520,225 --- _______ $40,630 ----- 2.9% NIA ------------------------ ------------------------------------------------
12/31/2001 160,477 $6,253,965 $38,971 N/A
12/31/2002 159,287 $6,383,475 $40 ,075 2.8% N/A
12/31/2003 153,723 $6,248,550 $40,648 1.4% N/A
12/31/2004 142,635 $6,306,447 $44,214 8.8% 806
12/31/2005 3 156,501 $6,791,891 $43,398 (1.8%) 810
12/31/2006 163,261 $7,326,798 $44 ,878 3.4% 758
12/31/2007 167,023 $7,721,819 $46,232 3.0% 760
12/31/2008 170,569 $8,130,136 $47,665 3.1% 766
12/31/2009 178,606 $8,512,192 $47,659 (0.0%) 776
12/31/2010 193,569 $8,750,064 $45,204 (5.2%) 787
12/31/2011 170,972 $8,550,51 1 $50,011 10.6% 791
12/31/2012 167,103 $8,590,879 $51,411 2.8% 798
12/31/2013 162,185 $8,671,835 $53,469 4.0% 799
12/31/2014 164,859 $9,115,767 $55,294 3.4% 802
12/31/2015 168,177 $9,544,132 $56,751 2.6% 804
12/31/2016 172,483 $9,872,557 $57,238 0.9% 805
12/31/2017 173,002 $10,098,889 $58,374 2.0% 802
12/31/2018 176,763 $10,851,980 $61,393 5.2% 798
12/31/2019 180,757 $11,533,740 $63,808 3.9% 802
12/31/2020 180,685 $12,042,674 $66 ,650 4.5% 797
12/31/2021 177,739 $12,684,124 $71,364 7.1% 798
12/31/2022 183,642 $13 ,856,583 $75,454 5.7% 796
Effecti ve in 2006, participating employers are defined for this purpose as any employer v.ith covered payroll during the
prior year. In prior years, employers v.ith liabilities but v.ithout covered payroll oore included as ooll.
Effecti ve in 2001, the Annual Payroll excludes the member pick-up , if any.
Effecti ve v.ith the 12/31/2005 valuation, OPSRP members and payroll are inclu ded.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Old Basis ------------------
New Basis 2
158 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Schedule of Retirees and Beneficiaries Added to and Removed from Rolls
Annual Allowances are shown in thousands.
Added to Rolls Removed from Rolls Rolls - End of Year %Increase Average
Valuation in Annual Annual
Date Allowances 2 Allowances
12/31/1993 60,841 $564,341 27.6% $9,276
12/31/1995 64,796 $700,171 24.1% $10,806
12/31/ 1997 69,624 $919,038 31.3% $13,200
12/31/1999 82,819 $1,299,380 41.4% $15,689
12/31/2000 82,458 $1,385,556 6.6% $16,803
12/31/2001 85,216 $1,514,491 9.3% $17,772
12/31/2002 89,482 $1,722,865 13.8% $19,254
12/31/2003 97,777 $2,040,533 8.4% $20,869
12/31/2004
6,754 $149,474 2,863 $35,151 101,668 $2,154,856 5.6% $21,195
12/31/2005 3 4,472 $149,127 3,217 $36,784 102,923 $2,267,198 5.2% $22,028
12/31/2006 3 5,060 $151,240 3,263 $39,735 104,720 $2,378,704 4.9% $22,715
12/31/2007 3 5,385 $183,232 3,304 $40,590 106,801 $2,521,345 6.0% $23,608
12/31/2008
5,963 $171,484 3,626 $47,062 109,138 $2,645,767 4.9% $24,242
12/31/2009 3 6,377 $226,713 3,374 $46,228 112,141 $2,826,252 6.8% $25,203
12/31/2010 3 6,359 $217,424 3,512 $51,627 114,988 $2,992,048 5.9% $26,021
12/31/2011 3 8,715 $282,098 3,679 $55,633 120,024 $3,218,514 7.6% $26,816
12/31/2012 3 7,023 $235,917 4,875 $59,353 122,172 $3,395,079 5.5% $27,789
12/31/2013 9,724 $307,551 3,644 $66,607 128,252 $3,636,023 7.1% $28,351
12/31/2014
6,910 $235,250 3,524 $66,621 131,638 $3,804,651 4.6% $28,902
12/31/2015
8,566 $304,818 3,781 $73,305 136,423 $4,036,165 6.1% $29,586
12/31/2016 4 6,413 $242,372 3,931 $80,903 138,905 $4,197,633 4.0 % $30,219
12/31/2017 4 10,075 $385,197 3,878 $83,921 145,102 $4,498,910 7.2% $31,005
12/31/2018 7,856 $297,542 3,933 $90,107 149,025 $4,706,345 4.6% $31,581
12/31/2019 8,200 $322,057 4,124 $95,486 153,101 $4,932,915 4.8% $32,220
12/31/2020 7,747 $320,438 4,587 $112,806 156,261 $5,140,547 4.2% $32,897
12/31/2021 8,264 $337,090 4,837 $125,758 159,688 $5,351,880 4.1% $33,515
12/31/2022 8,597 $370,754 4,973 $138,227 163,312 $5,584,406 4.3% $34,195
Additions to annual allovvances reflect the comb ined effects of new retirements and COLA increases since the previous valuation date.
Since last valuation date.
Annual allowances reflect estimated adjustments to retiree benefits due to the implementation of the Strunk v. PERB, et al. and City of Eugene v.
State of Oregon, PERB, et al. decis ions.
Annual allowances reflect estimated adjustments to retiree benefits for the Moro v. State of Oregon decision for records that were not already
adjusted in the data provided.
Milliman
This work product w as prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement S ystem for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own a ctuary or other q ualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 159
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Schedule of Funding Progress by Rate Pool
The liabilities and assets resulting from the last six actuarial valuations are as follows (amounts in millions)
Actuarial
I
Actuarial I I I
I
UAAL asa %
Value of Accrued Unfunded AAL Covered of Covered
Actuarial I Assets1•2 Liability (AAL)2 (UAAL) Funded Ratio Payroll 3 Payroll
Valuation Date (a) (b) (b-a) (a/b) (c) ((b-a)/c)
Tier One/Tier Two State & Local Government Rate Pool
12/31/2017 4 $33,366.0 $42,150.7 $8,784.7 79.2% $2,410.6 364.4%
12/31/2018 $31,798.9 $43,149.3 $11,350.4 73.7% $2,299.5 493.6%
12/31/2019 4 $34,060.0 $44,122.1 $10,062.1 77.2% $2,183.5 460 .8%
12/31/2020 $34,408 .2 $46,382.2 $11,974.0 74.2% $2,089.0 573.2%
12/31/202 1 4 $39,133.0 $47,155.1 $8,022.1 83.0% $1 ,981.7 404.8%
12/31/2022 $36,517.0 $48,119.5 $11,602.4 75.9% $1 ,883.4 616 .0%
Tier One/Tier Two School District Rate Pool
12/31/2017 $24,934.4 $29,677.4 $4,743.1 84.0% $1 ,443.7 328.5%
12/31/2018 $23,557.9 $29,898.4 $6,340.6 78.8% $1,401.2 452.5%
12/31/2019 $25,091 .5 $30,274.5 $5,183.0 82.9% $ 1,330.2 389.6%
12/31/2020 $25,345.4 $31,486.0 $6,140.6 80.5% $1,250.4 491.1%
12/31/202 1 $29,890 .8 $31,865 .4 $1 ,974 .7 93.8% $1 ,216 .3 162.3%
12/31/2022 $27,879.3 $32,457.6 $4,578.3 85.9% $1 ,195.0 383.1%
Tier One/Tier Two Independent Employers and Judiciary
12/31/2017 4 $5,018.2 $6,536.3 $1 ,518.1 76.8% $392.6 386.7%
12/31/2018 $4,756.2 $6,736.3 $1 ,980.1 70.6% $375.4 527.5%
12/31/2019 4 $5,061 .3 $6,916.0 $1 ,854.7 73.2% $360.3 514.8%
12/31/2020 $5,155.0 $7,373.8 $2,218.8 69.9% $347.9 637 .8%
12/31/2021 4 $5,807 .6 $7,528.6 $1 ,720.9 77.1% $320.8 536.5%
12/31/2022 $5,675.4 $7,743.0 $2,067.5 73.3% $310.2 666 .6%
OPSRP Rate Pool
12/31/2017 $4,116.5 $5,634.7 $1 ,518.2 73.1% $5,852.0 25.9%
12/31/2018 $4,783.0 $6,738.0 $1 ,955.0 71 .0% $6,775.9 28.9%
12/31/2019 $6,190.4 $8,082.2 $1 ,89 1.8 76.6% $7,659.8 24.7%
12/31/2020 $7,548.8 $10,008 .1 $2,459 .3 75.4% $8,355.4 29.4%
12/31/2021 $10,251 .2 $11,806.2 $1,555.0 86.8% $9,165.3 17.0%
12/31/2022 $1 1,060.9 $14,544.9 $3,484.1 76.0% $10,468.0 33.3%
Postemployment Healthcare Benefit s - Retirement Health Insurance Account
12/31/2017 $553.3 $437.6 ($115.7) 126.4% $4,246.9 (2.7%)
12/31/2018 $570 .7 $411.7 ($159.1) 138.6% $4,076.1 (3.9%)
12/31/2019 $644.1 $403.9 ($240.3) 159.5% $3,873.9 (6.2%)
12/31/2020 $660 .2 $383 .6 ($276 .6) 172.1% $3,687 .3 (7.5%)
12/31/2021 $763.2 $369.2 ($394.0) 206.7% $3,518.8 (11.2%)
12/31/2022 $720.0 $345.0 ($374 .9) 208 .7% $3,388.6 (11.1%)
Postemployment Healthcare Benefits - Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
12/31/2017 $29.8 $69.4 $39.5 43.0% $1 ,212.2 3.3%
12/31/2018 $38.5 $62.7 $24.3 61.3% $1 ,159.5 2.1%
12/31/2019 $51 .9 $59 .3 $7.4 87.5% $1 ,120.6 0.7%
12/31/2020 $63.6 $48.0 ($15.6) 132.6% $1,091.8 (1.4%)
12/31/202 1 $82.9 $45.9 ($37.0) 180.4% $1 ,053.3 (3.5%)
12/31/2022 $85 .9 $41.3 ($44 .6) 208 .0% $1 ,008 .9 (4.4%)
Notes:
Side account assets are included with Tier Onefrie r Too assets.
Excludes effect of Multnomah Fire District (net UAAL of $102 milli on as of 12/31/2022).
3 Covered payroll shov.n is for members of the rate pool benefit ing from the specified program. For example, Tier Onefrier Too School
District payroll is only payroll for Tier Onefrier Too members and excludes OPSRP. However, UAL is amortized using combined Tier
One/Tie r Too and OPSRP payroll.
' Reflects the transfer in assets and liabilities for new employers that joined the SLGRP effective January 1 following the valuation date.
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retiremen t System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewi ng the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
160 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Solvency Test
Pension and Retiree Healthcare Plans Combined
(dollar amounts in millions)
The schedu le below shows results from the defined benefit pension plans and retiree healthcare plans on
a consolidated basis. Results are also shown separate ly for each program: Tier One/Tier Two, OPSRP,
and retiree healthcare . Note that the defined benefit pension plan constitutes over 99% of the
consolidated assets and liabilities.
~
Portion of Actuarial Accrued
Valuation Valuation
-
Date 2 Assets 1•3
12/31/2013 4 $7,120.1 $39,531.5 $16,476.8 $60,372.9 100% 100% 83%
12/31/2014 5 $6,950.4 $46,576.7 $20,470.8 $61,798.3 100% 100% 40%
12/31/2015 4 $6,476.8 $49,158.7 $21,094.5 $60,430.6 100% 100% 23%
12/31/2016 $6,168.1 $52,232.7 $23,101.0 $61,543.2 100% 100% 14%
12/31/2017 4 $5,585.9 $55,636.9 $23,340.3 $67,909.2 100% 100% 29%
12/31/2018 $5,153.6 $57,297.7 $24,597.8 $65,411.5 100% 100% 12%
12/31/2019 4 $4,907.4 $59,461.0 $25,540.5 $71,008.3 100% 100% 26%
12/31/2020 6 $4,583.7 $63,068.9 $28,079.3 $73,102.1 100% 100% 19%
12/31/202 1 4 $4,557.6 $64,992.6 $29,266.3 $85,847.4 100% 100% 56%
12/31/2022 $4,099.4 $67,005.1 $32,190.6 $81,879.8 100% 100% 33%
1 Includes effect of Multnomah Fire District (net UAAL of $102 million as of 12/31/2022).
An extensive revision of the actuarial assumptions occurs prior to each even-year valuation; therefore , the figures are not directly comparable.
Includes the value of UAL Lump Sum Side Accounts.
' Reflects the transfer in assets and liabilities for new employers that joined the SLGRP effective January 1 follo"Mng the valuation date.
The 12/31/2014 valuation reflects benefit changes from the Oregon Supreme Court's ruling in Moro v. State of Oregon, which overturned portions
of Senate Bills 822 and 861.
• Results for 12/31/2020 and later include Employee Pension Stability Accounts (EPSA) balances as member contributions.
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrl ur.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 161
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Solvency Test
Tier One/Tier Two Pension
(dollar amounts in millions)
Actuarial Accrued Liabilitl'J1
Active Retired
Valuation
Date 2
Member Members and
Contributions Beneficiaries
Other
Members
(3)
Valuation
Assets 1•3
Portion of Actuarial Accrued
Liabilities Covered by Assets
(1) (2) (1) (2) (3)
12/31/2013 4 $7,120.1 $39,116.2 $14,114.1 $58,384.0 100% 100% 86%
12/31/2014 5 $6,950.4 $46,113.5 $17,331.0 $59,370.6 100% 100% 36%
12/31/2015 4 $6,476.8 $48,641.5 $17,335.7 $57,611.0 100% 100% 14%
12/31/2016 $6,168.1 $51,655.5 $18,429.6 $58,037.6 100% 100% 1%
12/31/2017 4 $5,585.9 $54,967.4 $17,868.1 $63,209.7 100% 100% 15%
12/31/2018 $5,153.6 $56,534.9 $18,148.3 $60,019.3 100% 97% 0%
12/31/2019 4 $4,907.4 $58,567.8 $17,888.4 $64,121.8 100% 100% 4%
12/31/2020 6 $4,557.6 $62,012.8 $18,721 .9 $64,829.5 100% 97% 0%
12/31/2021 $4,446.8 $63,723.1 $ 18,425.2 $74,750.1 100% 100% 36%
12/31/2022 $3,924.8 $65,503.9 $18,935 .1 $70,013.1 100% 100% 3%
1 Includes effect of Multnomah Fire District (net UAAL of $102 million as of 12131/2022).
2 An extensive revision of the actuarial assumptions occurs prior to each even-year valuation; therefore, the figures are not directly comparable .
3 Includes the value of UAL Lump Sum Side Accounts.
' Reflect s the transfer in assets and liabilities for new employers that joined the SLGRP effective January 1 follo'Mng the valuation date.
5 The 12/31/2014 valuation refle cts benefit changes from the Oregon Supreme Court's ruling in Moro v. State of Oregon, "'11ich overturned portions of
Senate Bills 822 and 861.
• Results for 12/3112020 and later include Employee Pension Stabili ty Accounts (EPSA) balances as member contributions.
OPSRP Pension
(dollar amounts in millions)
Actuarial Accrued Liability
Active Retired
Member Members and
Valuation Contributions Beneficiaries
Other
Members Valuation
Portion of Actuarial Accrued
Liabilities Covered b Assets
Date 1 (1) (2) (3) Assets (1) (2) (3)
12/3 1/2013 $0.0 $51.2 $2,192.1 $1,630.2 100% 100% 72%
12/31/20 14 2 $0.0 $92.4 $2,971.6 $2,024.6 100% 100% 65%
12/3 1/2015 $0.0 $144.6 $3,597.9 $2,389.1 100% 100% 62%
12/3 1/2016 $0.0 $201.1 $4,515.9 $3,021.4 100% 100% 62%
12/3 1/2017 $0.0 $310.1 $5,324 .5 $4,116.5 100% 100% 71%
12/3 1/2018 $0.0 $419.0 $6,318.9 $4,783.0 100% 100% 69%
12/3 1/2019 $0.0 $554.3 $7,527.9 $6,190.4 100% 100% 75%
12/3 1/2020 3 $26.1 $726.1 $9,255 .9 $7,548.8 100% 100% 73%
12/31/2021 $110.8 $950.3 $10,745.1 $10,251.2 100% 100% 86%
12/3 1/2022 $174.6 $1 ,197.7 $13,172.6 $11,060.9 100% 100% 74%
1 An extens ive revision of the actuarial ass umptions occurs prior to each even-year valuation ; therefore , the figures are not directly comparab le.
2 The 12/31/2014 valuation reflects benefit changes from the Orego n Supreme Court 's ruling in Moro v. State of Oregon, which overturned portions of
Senate Bills 822 and 861.
3 Results for 12/31/2020 and later include Employee Pension Stability Accounts (EPSA) balances as member contributions .
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlur.t.
162 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Retiree Healthcare (RHIA and RHIPA)
(dollar amounts in millions)
Retiree Health Insurance Account (RHIA)
Actuarial Accrued Liabilfil'l.
Retired
Active Member Members and
Contributions Beneficiaries Other Members Valuation
Assets
Portion of Actuarial Accrued
Liabilities Covered by Assets
Valuation Date' (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
12/31/2013 $0.0 $348 .0 $125.6 $353.5 100%
12/31/2014 $0.0 $355 .1 $113.3 $395.9 100%
12/31/2015 $0.0 $357.7 $107.9 $419.3 100%
12/31/2016 $0.0 $361 .7 $102.0 $465.0 100%
12/31/2017 $0.0 $343.9 $93.7 $553.3 100%
12/31/2018 $0.0 $329 .8 $81.8 $570.7 100%
12/31/2019 $0.0 $326.9 $77.0 $644.1 100%
12/31/2020 $0.0 $319.3 $64.3 $660.2 100%
12/31/2021 $0.0 $308 .9 $60.2 $763.2 100%
12/31/2022 $0.0 $294 .5 $50.5 $720.0 100%
1 An extensive revision of the actuarial assumptions occurs pn·or to each even-year valuation; therefore, the figures are not directly comparable.
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA)
Actuarial Accrued Liabilfil'l"
100% 4%
100% 36%
100% 57%
100% 101%
100% 224%
100% 294%
100% 412%
100% 530%
100% 754%
100% 842%
Retired
Active Member Members and
Contributions Beneficiaries Other Members Valuation
Assets
Portion of Actuarial Accrued
Liabilities Covered b Assets
Valuation Date 1 (1) (2) (3) (1) (2)
12/31/2013 $0.0 $16.1 $45.1 $5.2 100% 33%
12/31/2014 $0.0 $15.7 $54.9 $7.2 100% 46%
12/31/2015 $0.0 $14.9 $52.9 $11.2 100% 75%
12/31/2016 $0.0 $14.4 $53.5 $19.1 100% 100%
12/31/2017 $0.0 $14.4 $53.5 $19.1 100% 1 00%
12/31/2018 $0.0 $14 .0 $48.8 $38.5 100% 1 00%
12/31/2019 $0.0 $12 .1 $47.2 $51 .9 100% 1 00%
12/31/2020 $0.0 $10 .8 $37.2 $63.6 100% 100%
12/31/2021 $0.0 $10 .2 $35.7 $82.9 100% 100%
12/31/2022 $0.0 $8.9 $32.4 $85.9 100% 100%
1 An extensive revision of the actuarial assumptions occurs prior to each even-year valuation; therefore, the figures are not directly comparable.
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlur.t.
(3)
0%
0%
0%
9%
9%
50%
84%
142%
203%
238%
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 163
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Analysis of Financial Experience
The schedu le below shows results from the defined benefit pension plans and retiree healthcare plans on
a conso lidated basis. Results are also shown separate ly for each program on subsequent pages.
Gains and Losses in Unfunded Accrued Liability Resulting from Differences Between Assumed
Experience and Actual Experience and Assumption Changes
(dollar amounts in millions)
$ Gain (or Loss) for Year
Pension and Retiree Healthcare Plans ~
Type of Activity
Retirements from Active Status ($39.4) ($89.9)
Active Mortality and Withdrawal 92.4 74.0
Pay Increases (831.7) (676.2)
Contributions 222.5 341.3
Interest Crediting Experience 130.6 (72.3)
Investment Income (6,632.8) 8,739.5
Retirement, Mortality and Lump Sums from Inactive Status 12.1 14.0
Retiree and Beneficiary Mortality 33.4 137.7
New Entrants 1 (145.5) (106.0)
Other (48.2) 142.5
Gain (or Loss) During Year from Financial Experience ($7,206.7) $8,504.6
Non-Recurring Items
Assumption Changes (1,176.9) 0.0
Plan Changes 0.0 0.0
Composite Gain (or Loss) During Year ($8,383.5) $8,504.6
1 Accrued liability associated with new entrants is shown. For a full assessment of the new entrant effect on
UAL, this would need to be combined Vlith contributions associated with new entrants.
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlu r.t.
164 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
The schedules below show results from the Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP pens ion programs separa tely.
Gains and Losses in Unfunded Accrued Liability Resulting from Differences between Assumed
Experience and Actual Experience and Assumption Changes
(dollar amounts in millions)
$ Gain (or Loss) for Year
Tier One/Tier Two Pension Program 2022 2021
Type of Activity
Retirements from Active Status
Active Mortality and Withdrawal
Pay Increases
Contributions
Interest Crediting Experience
Investment Income
Retirement, Mortality and Lump Sums from Inactive Status
Retiree and Beneficiary Mortality
New Entrants
Other
Gain (or Loss) During Year from Financial Experience
Non-Recurring Items
Assumption Changes
Plan Changes
Composite Gain (or Loss) During Year
($32.2) ($87.2)
25.2 19.7
(450.6) (412.7)
160.4 255.6
130.6 (72.3)
(5,616.3) 7,445.1
1.7 8.1
31.7 136.8
(2.2) (2.2)
(53.3) 126.5
($5,805.0) $7,417.5
(582.1) 0.0
0.0 0.0
($6,387.1) $7,417.5
$ Gain (or Loss) for Year
OPSRP Pension Program 2022 2021
Type of Activity
Retirements from Active Status
Active Mortality and Withdrawal
Pay Increases
Contribution s
Investment Income
Retirem ent, Mortality and Lump Sums from Inactive Status
Retiree and Beneficiary Mortality
New Entrants
Other
Gain (or Loss) During Year from Financial Experience
Non-Recurring Items
Assumption Changes
Plan Changes
Composite Gain (or Loss) During Year
($7.2 )
$67.1
($381.2)
$61.1
($944.0 )
$10.5
$1.7
($143.3)
($9.9)
($1,345.2)
($605.1)
$0.0
($1,950.3)
($2.6)
54.3
(263. 6)
84.3
1,197.5
5.9
0.9
(103.7)
2.7
$975.6
0.0
0.0
$975.6
1 Accrued liability associated vith newentr ants is shoW1. For a full assessment of the new entrant effect on UAL, this w:iuld need to
be combined vith contributions associated vith new entrants.
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes . Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrl ur.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 165
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
The schedule below shows results from the retiree healthcare programs.
Gains and Losses in Unfunded Accrued Liability Resulting from Differences Between Assumed
Experience and Actual Experience and Assumption Changes
(dollar amounts in millions)
$ Gain (or Loss) for Year
RHIA RHIPA
Retiree Healthcare Programs 2021
Type of Activity
Contributions $0.4 $0.6 $0.6
Investment Income (65.1) 88.3 (7.4)
Other 11.1 10.6 4.0
Gain (or Loss) During Year from Financial Experience ($53.6) $99.5 ($2.8)
Non-Recurring Items
Assumption Changes 8.8 0.0 1.5
Plan Changes 0.0 0 .0 0 .0
Composite Gain (or Loss) During Year ($44.8) $99.5 ($1.3)
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrl ur.t.
$0.7
8.6
2.7
$12.0
0.0
0.0
$12.0
166 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Accounting/ACFR Exhibits
Actuarial Schedules
Schedules of Funding Progress
(dollar amounts in millions)
Actuarial Actuarial UAALasa %
Value of Accrued Unfunded AAL Covered of Covered
Actuarial Assets1 Liability (AAL) (UAAL) Funded Ratio Payroll Payroll
Valuation Date (a) (b) (b-a) (a/b) (c) ((b-a)/c)
Pension Benefits - Tier One/Tier Two and OPSRP2
12/31/2013 3 $60,014.1 $62,593.6 $2,579.5 95.9% $8,67 1.8 29.7%
12/31/2014 4 $61,395.2 $73,458.9 $12,063.7 83.6% $9,1 15.8 132.3%
12/31/201 5 3 $60,000.1 $76,196.6 $16,196.5 78.7% $9,544 .1 169.7%
12/31/2016 $61,059.0 $80,970.3 $19,911.2 75.4% $9,872.6 201.7%
12/31/2017 3 $67,326.1 $84,056.1 $16,730.0 80.1% $10,098.9 165.7%
12/31/2018 $64,802.3 $86,574.7 $21 ,772.4 74.9% $10,852.0 200.6%
12/31/2019 3 $70,312.3 $89,445.7 $19,133.5 78.6% $11,533.7 165.9%
12/31/2020 $72,378.3 $95,300.4 $22,922. 1 75.9% $12,042.7 190.3%
12/31/2021 3 $85,001.3 $98,40 1.4 $13,400. 1 86.4% $12,684.1 105.6%
12/31/2022 $81,074.0 $102 ,908.8 $21 ,834.8 78.8% $13,856.6 157.6%
Postemployment Healthcare Benefits - Retirement Health Insurance Account
12/31/2013 $353 .5 $473.6 $120.0 74.7% $8,671.8 1.4%
12/31/2014 $395 .9 $468.4 $72.5 8 4.5% $9,115.8 0.8%
12/31/2015 $419.3 $465.6 $46.3 90.0% $9,544.1 0.5%
12/31/2016 $465.0 $463.7 ($1.3) 100.3% $9,872.6 (0.0%)
12/31/2017 $553.3 $437.6 ($115.7) 126.4% $10,098.9 (1.1%)
12/31/2018 $570.7 $4 11.7 ($159.1) 138.6% $10,852.0 (1.5%)
12/31/2019 $644.1 $403.9 ($240.3) 159.5% $11,533.7 (2.1%)
12/31/2020 $660.2 $383.6 ($276.6) 172.1% $12,042.7 (2.3%)
12/31/2021 $763.2 $369.2 ($394.0) 206.7% $12,684.1 (3.1%)
12/31/2022 $720 .0 $345.0 ($374.9) 208.7% $13,856.6 (2.7%)
Postemployment Healthcare Benefits - Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
12/31/2013 $5.2 $61.2 $55.9 8.6% $2,53 1.5 2.2%
12/31/2014 $7.2 $70.5 $63.3 10.2% $2,718.9 2.3%
12/31/2015 $11.2 $67.8 $56.6 16.5% $2,83 1.8 2.0%
12/31/2016 $19.1 $67.9 $48.8 28.1% $2,88 1.4 1.7%
12/31/2017 $29.8 $69.4 $39.5 43.0% $2,984.5 1.3%
12/31/2018 $38.5 $62.7 $24.3 61 .3% $3,211.6 0.8%
12/31/2019 $51.9 $59.3 $7.4 87.5% $3,479.8 0.2%
12/31/2020 $63.6 $48.0 ($15.6) 132.6% $3,712.6 (0.4%)
12/31/2021 $82.9 $45.9 ($37.0) 180.4% $3,938.0 (0.9%)
12/31/2022 $85.9 $4 1.3 ($44.6) 208.0% $4,278.2 (1.0%)
Notes:
Side account ass ets are included with pension assets.
2 Includes UAAL for Multnomah Fire Distri ct ($102 milli on as of 12131/2022).
Reflects the transfer in assets and liabilities for new employers that joined the SLGRP effective Janua ry 1 following the valuation date.
The 12131/2014 valuation reflects benefit changes from the Oregon Supreme Court's ruling in Moro v. State of Oregon, which overturned
portions of Senate Bills 822 and 861.
l:. Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlur.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 167
Milliman Actuarial Valuation
Summary of Plan Provisions
Milliman
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewin g the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
168 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Summary of Plan Provisions
The following section summarizes the plan provisions considered in the actuarial valuation. A more detailed
description of plan provisions is available from PERS.
Membership
Member
Contributions
Employer
Contributions
Milliman
All employees of public employers participating in this System who are in qualifying
positions become members of the System after completing six months of service except
those who are eligible for and have elected to participate in an optional retirement plan.
Different benefit provisions of the plan apply based on date of hire.
Tier One
Tier Two
OPSRP
Judges
Judges
All others
Hired prior to 1996
Hired after 1995 and before August 29, 2003
Hired after August 28, 2003 , and neither a judge nor a former Tier One/Tier
Two member eligible to reestablish Tier One/Tier Two membership
Members of the State Judiciary
7% of salary
Prior to January 1, 2004 , Tier One/Tie r Two members contributed 6% of
salary to member accounts.
Effective July 1, 2020: 2.50% of salary for Tier One/Tier Two members and
0.75% of salary for OPSRP members (only applicable to members earning
at least $2,500 per month, indexed for inflation and further increased to
$3,333 per month effective in 2022) are contributed to Employee Pension
Stability Accounts (EPSA). EPSA balances will not affect the calculation of
Money Match or Formula Plus Annuity benefits.
Set by the PERS Board based on actuarial calculations that follow Board rate-setting
policies for employers .
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 169
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Summary of Chapter 238 Provisions - Tier One/T ier Two and Judges
Normal
Retirement
Date
Normal
Retirement
Allowance
Milliman
Police and Fire Age 55
Judges Age 65
Tier One General Service Age 58
Tier Two General Service Age 60
For Members who are not Judges , the greatest of the Full Formula benefit, the Money
Match benefit, or the Formula Plus Annuity benefit (only available to Members who made
contributions before August 21, 1981 ). For Members with 15 or more years of creditable
service, the benefit will not be less than the minimum service retirement allowance of $100
per month, as described in ORS 238.310.
Full Formula The percentage multiplier from the table below multiplied by final average
salary and years of creditable service plus a prior service pension, if
applicable.
Percentage Multiplier Membership Classification
2.00%
1.67%
Fire, Police and Legislators
All other members
Money Match The Member's account balance and a matching employer amount
converted to an actuarially equivalent annuity.
Formula Plus The Member's account balance converted to an actuarially equivalent
Annuity cash refund annuity plus the percentage multiplier from the table below
multiplied by final average salary and years of creditable service, plus a
prior service pension, if applicable.
Judges
Percentage Multiplier Membership Classification
1.35%
1.00%
Fire, Police and Legislators
All other members
Final average salary multiplied by the first percentage multiplier from the
table below for up to 16 years of service plus the second percentage
multiplier for any service in excess of 16 years, but not to exceed the
maximum percentage of final average salary also shown below. Judges
must elect Plan A or Plan B no later than age 60. A "Plan B" judge must
serve as a pro tern judge for a total of 175 days postretirement.
Percentage Factor Percentage Factor Percentage of Final
I I I
Maximum
Plan (up to 16 years) (after 16 years) Average Salary
A
B
2.8125%
3.75%
1.67%
2.00%
65%
75%
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
170 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Final Average
Salary
Creditable
Service
Prior Service
Pension
SB 656/HB
3349
Adjustment
Milliman
The greater of:
Average salary earned during the three calendar years in which the member was paid the
highest salary, even if one of those years is less than a full calendar year.
Total salary earned over the last 36 months of employment divided by the actual months of
service during that 36-month period.
Covered salary for this purpose includes the value of member contributions assumed and
paid by employers, any payment due to an employer's participation in the Unused Sick
Leave program, and, for Tier One members, lump sum payment of unused vacation time.
For Tier Two members, covered salary is limited by Internal Revenue Code 401 (a)(17).
The limit was $280,000 in 2019. Tier One members are not subject to this limit.
Under Senate Bill 1049, passed during the 2019 legislative session, the salary included in
the determination of Final Average Salary will be limited for all members beginning in
2020. The limit will be equal to $195,000 in 2020 and will be indexed with inflation in later
years. For this purpose, payment due to the unused sick leave program will not be affected
by the Final Average Salary limit. However, lump sum payments of unused vacation time
for Tier One members will be included in total salary subject to the limit.
The number of years and months an active Member is paid a salary by a participating
PERS employer and PERS benefits are being funded.
Benefits payable on account of Prior Service Credit for a member's service with a
participating employer prior to the employer 's participation in PERS, as described in
ORS 238.442.
All members receive an increase to their monthly retirement benefit equal to the greater of
the increase under Senate Bill 656 (SB 656) or House Bill 3349 (HB 3349). The
adjustment for SB 656 only applies to members who established membership prior to
July 14, 1995. Senate Bill 822, enacted in 2013, limits eligibility for these adjustments to
only PERS beneficiaries who pay Oregon state income tax.
SB656
Increase
General Service Police & Fire
0-9
10-14
15-19
20-24
25-29
30 & Over
0.0%
1.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
0.0%
1.0
1.0
2.5
4.0
4.0
HB 3349
Increase
Service prior to
October 1, 1991
1 - maximum Oregon personal
income tax rate (limited to 9%)
- 1) X
All Service
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 171
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Early
Retirement
Eligibility
Early
Retirement
Allowance
Vesting
Termination
Benefits
Optional Forms
of Retirement
Allowance
Preretirement
Death Benefit
Eligibility
Preretirement
Death Benefit
Milliman
Police and Fire
Judges
Age 50 or 30 years of service
Age 60
General Service Age 55 or 30 years of service
Normal retirement allowance , actuarially reduced to early retirement age. However , there
is no reduction applied if a member has completed 30 years of service (25 years for police
& fire members) or for judges in Plan B.
Contributions made in any part of five calendar years or attainment of age 50 (45 for police
& fire) while working in a qualifying position.
Non-Vested
Vested
Payment of member's account balance.
Same as normal (or early) retirement allowance , but comme ncement is
deferred to normal (or early) retirement date.
The normal form of benefit is a cash refund annuity Uoint and two-thirds survivor
contingent annuity for a married judge). All optional amounts are adjusted to be actuarially
equivalent.
Options Available
Life annuity
Cash refund annuity
Life annuity guaranteed 15 years
Joint and 50% or 100% survivor contingent annuity, with or without pop-up feature
Partial Lump Sum: Refund of member contribution account balance plus a pension (under
any optional form) of employer-paid portion of the Full Formula or Money Match annuity .
Total Lump Sum: Refund of member contribution account plus a matching employer
amount.
Judges
All others
Judges
All others
Six or more years of service.
Death occurring while the member is an employee of a participating
employer or within 120 days of termination provided the employee does
not withdraw the account balance or retire, or a result of injuries received
while in the service of a participating employer.
The spouse shall receive a life pension equal to two-thirds of the serv ice
retirement allowance. The beneficiary of an unmarried judge shall receive
the member's accumulated contributions with interest.
The member 's account balance plus a matching employer amount.
If the beneficiary is the member 's spouse , they may instead elect to
receive the following benefit:
• If the member was eligible for retirement , the actuarial equivalent of
the retirement benefit the member was eligible to receive at date of
death.
• If the member was not eligible for retirement, 50% of the actuarial
equivalent of the retirement benefit the member would have been
eligible to receive if they had terminated employment on their date
of death and retired at the earliest possible date.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
172 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Additional
Police & Fire
Death Benefits
Disability
Benefit
Eligibility
Disability
Benefits
Waiting Time
Service
Purchases
Police & Fire
Unit Purchases
Automatic
Postretirement
Cost
of Living
Adjustments
(COLAs)
Milliman
Upon the death of a retired police officer or firefighter, the surviving spouse or dependent
children under age 18 will receive a monthly benefit based on 25% of the cash refund
retirement allowance due to police and fire service.
Duty
Non-Duty
Disability occurring as a direct result of a job-r elated injury or illness,
regardless of length of service .
Disability occurring after ten years of service (six years , if a judge), but
prior to normal retirement eligib ility.
The normal retirement allowance calculated based on the service credit that wou ld have
been earned if the member had continued working to age 58 (age 55 for police and fire,
age 65 for judge members) payable commencing immediately .
Fire and Police Members' Alternative
In lieu of the above , firefighters and police officers who qualify for duty disability may elect
to receive a benefit of 50% of final average monthly salary at the time of disableme nt.
Minimum Monthly Retirement Allowance
Judges 45% of final average monthly salary.
All others $100 for a member with at least 15 years of creditable service, actuarially
reduced if an optional form of benefit is chosen.
Reduction of Benefits
Whenever a disabled employee's disability benefit and earned income for any month
exceed the monthly salary received at the time of disablement or $400, if greater, the
disability benefit will be reduced by the excess .
For Tier Two members , the disability benefit may not exceed the member's salary at the
time of disablement.
Members with at least 10 years of combined credited and/or prior serv ice under PERS
may elect to purchase service credit for the six-month "waiting time" period worked prior to
establishing membership in the system. The waiting time purchase is interest-free and
must be purchased in one payment prior to retirement.
Police & fire members may purchase 60-month an nuity benefits (up to $80 per month) that
must be paid out by age 65 and cannot commence prior to the earliest retirement age. The
amount purchased by the member is matched by the employer. In certain situations , such
as termination of employment prior to retiring, or working beyond age 65, the employer's
matching purchase is forfeited .
All monthly pension and annuity benefits except unit purchases are eligible for
postretirement adjustments . As a result of the Senate Bills 822 and 861 and the Oregon
Supreme Court decision in Moro v. State of Oregon , automatic postret irement adjustments
are based on a blended COLA as described below.
Automatic COLA
prior to SB 822 and
SB 861
Benefits were adjusted annually to reflect the increase or
decrease in the Consumer Price Index (Portland area - all items)
as published by the Bu reau of Labor Statistics.
The maximum adjustment to be made for any year was 2% of the
previous year's benefit. Any CPI change in excess of the limit
was accumulated for future benefit adjustments which would
otherwise be less than the limit. No benefit was decreased below
its original amount.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 173
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Ad Hoc
Adjustments
Automatic
Adjustments
Provided by Senate
Bills 822 and 861
Blended COLA after
Moro decision
This legislation, passed in 2013, provided for that benefits would
be increased annually based on a marginal rate schedule. The
increase is calculated as 1.25% on the first $60,000 of annual
benefit and 0.15% on amounts above $60,000 of annual benefit.
The Supreme Court decision in Moro requires that members "will
be entitled to receive during retirement a blended COLA rate that
reflects the different COLA provisions applicable to benefits
earned at different times." The Supreme Court did not articulate
a specific methodology for determining the blended COLA. For
purposes of this valuation, we have determined the blend based
on creditable service earned before and after October 2013. This
approach is consistent with OAR 459-005-0510 adopted by the
PERS Board in September 2015.
From time to time, as granted by the Legislature, retired members and beneficiaries have
received increases in their monthly benefits.
Variable Annuity Contributions
Program
Prior to January 1, 2004, members could elect to have 25, 50 or
75 percent of their contributions invested in the variable account.
Interest Credit
on Member
Accounts
Retiree
Healthcare -
Medicare
Supplement
(RH/A)
Milliman
Benefit
Tier One Regular
Tier Two Regular
Variable
Retiree Eligibility
At retirement, members may elect to receive a variable annuity
with the funds accumulated in their variable account.
Alternatively , members may elect to have all or a portion of the
funds in their variable account transferred back to the regular
account and receive an annuity from the System as though no
variable annuity program existed.
The employer-prov ided benefit, however, is based on the
earnings the member would have received in the regular
account.
Actuarially assumed rate of return until the rate guarantee
reserve has been fully funded for three consecutive years and
the Board elects to credit additional interest.
Amount determined by the Board based on actual investment
earnings of the regular account.
Actual earnings in variable account.
All of the following must be met:
(a) Currently receiving a retirement allowance from the System,
(b) Covered for eight years before retirement,
(c) Enrolled in a PERS-sponsored health plan, and
(d) Enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
174 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Retiree
Healthcare -
Under Age 65
(RH/PA)
Changes in
Plan Provisi ons
Milliman
Surviving Spouse or
Dependent Eligibility
Benefit Amount
Retiree Eligibility
Surviving Spouse or
Dependent Eligibility
Benefit
A surviving spouse or dependent of a deceased RHIA-eligible
retiree is eligible for RHIA benefits if they are enrolled in both
Medicare Part A and Part B, and either of the following criteria
are met:
(a) Currently receiving a retirement allowance from the System,
or
(b) The surviving spouse or dependent was covered under the
eligible retiree's PERS-sponsored health insurance at the
time of the retiree's death and the deceased retiree retired
before May 1 , 1991.
A monthly contribution of up to $60 per retiree is applied to
PERS-sponsored Medicare supplemental insurance costs.
Retired PERS members who were state employees at the time of
retirement, are enrolled in a PERS-sponsored health plan, and
are not eligible for Medicare.
A surviving spouse or dependent of a deceased RHIPA-elig ible
retiree is eligible for RHIPA benefits if they are not yet eligible for
Medicare, and either of the following criteria are met:
(a) Currently receiving a retirement allowance from the System,
or
(b) The surviving spouse or dependent was covered under the
eligible retiree's PERS-sponsored health plan at the time of
the retiree's death and the deceased retiree retired on or
after September 29, 1991 .
A percentage (as shown in the table below) of the maximum
monthly subsidy based on years of service. The maximum
monthly subsidy is calculated annually as the average difference
between the health insurance premiums paid by active state
employees and the premium retirees would pay if they were
rated separately from active state employees.
The maximum monthly subsidy for 2023 is $474.90 per month.
Years of Service with State I
Employer Subsidized Amount
Under8 0%
8-9 50%
10-14 60%
15-19 70%
20-24 80%
25-29 90%
30 & Over 100%
There were no changes in the Tier One/Tier Two benefit provisions reflected since the
December 31, 2021 actuarial valuation .
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes stated herein and may not be appropriate to use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assu mes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qual ified professional when reviewing the
Millimr1n work nrn<t11r.t.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 175
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Summary of Chapter 238A Provisions - OPS RP
Normal
Retirement Date
Normal
Retirement
Allowance
Final Average
Salary
Early Retirement
Eligibility
Early Retirement
Allowance
Vesting
Vested
Termination
Benefit
Optional Forms of
Retirement
Benefit
Preretirement
Death Benefit
Eligibility
l:. Milliman
Police & Fire
General Service
School Districts
Age 60 or age 53 with 25 years of retirement credit
Age 65 or age 58 with 30 years of retirement credit
Age 65 or age 58 with 30 calendar years of active membersh ip
A single life annuity equal to final average salary times years of retirement credit
attributable to service as fire and police times 1.8% plus final average salary times all
other years of retirement credit times 1.5%.
The greater of:
Average salary earned during the three calendar years in which the membe r was paid
the highest salary, even if one of those years is less than a full calendar year.
Total salary earned over the last 36 months of employment divided by the actual months
of service during that 36-month period .
Covered salary for this purpose includes base pay, plus overtime up to an average
amount, plus bonuses, plus member contributions paid by the employer on a salary
reduction basis. Excludes payments of unused vacation or accumulated sick leave at
retirement, and member contributions "assumed and paid" by the employer .
For OPSRP members , covered salary is limited by Internal Revenue Code 401(a)(17)
The limit was $280,000 in 2019.
Under Senate Bill 1049 passed during the 2019 legislative session , the salary included
in the determination of Final Average Salary will be limited for all members beginning in
2020. The limit will be equal to $195 ,000 in 2020 and will be indexed with inflation in
later years.
Police & Fire Age 50 and 5 years of vesting service
General Service Age 55 and 5 years of vesting service
Normal retirement allowance , actuarially reduced to early retirement age.
Five years or attainment of normal retirement age.
Same as normal (or early) retirement allowance , but commencement is deferred to
normal (or early) retirement date.
The normal form of benefit is a life annuity. All optional amounts are adjusted to be
actuarially equivalent.
Options Available
Life annuity
Joint and 50% or 100% survivor contingent benefit , with or without pop-up feature
Lump sum if monthly normal retirement benefit is less than $200 or if lump sum value is
less than $5,000.
Death of a vested membe r before retirement benefits begin.
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlur.t.
176 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Milliman Actuarial Valuation Summary of Plan Provisions
Preretirement
Death Benefit
Disability Benefit
Eligibility
Disability Benefit
Amounts
Postretirement
Adjustments
Changes in Plan
Provisions
l:. Milliman
If the member was eligible for reti rement , the actuarial equivalent of the retirement
benefit the member was eligible to receive at date of death.
If the member was not eligible for retirement , 50% of the actuarial equivalent of the
retirement benefit the member would have been eligible to receive if they had terminated
employment on their date of death and retired at the earliest possible date.
Duty Disablement occurring as a direct result of a job-related injury or
illness, regardless of length of service .
Non-Duty
Preretirement
Benefit
Retirement
Benefit
Disablement occurring after ten years of service, but prior to
normal retirement eligibility.
45% of salary during last full month of employment before
disability , reduced if the total benefit exceeds 75% of salary.
Benefit is payable monthly until normal retirement age.
Same formula as Normal Retirement Benefit, except:
Final average salary is adjusted to reflect cost-of-living increases
from date of disability to normal retirement age, and
Retirement credits continue to accrue from date of disability to
normal retirement age.
All monthly pension and annuity benefits except unit purchases are eligible for
postretirement adjustments. As a result of the Senate Bills 822 and 861 and the Oregon
Supreme Court decision in Moro v. State of Oregon , automatic postretirement
adjustments are based on a blended COLA as described below.
Automatic COLA
prior to SB 822
and SB 861
Automatic
Adjustments
Provided by
Senate Bills 822
and 861
Benefits were adjusted annual ly to reflect the increase or decrease
in the Consume r Price Index (Portland area - all items) as
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics .
The maximum adjustment to be made for any year was 2% of the
previous year's benefit. Any CPI change in excess of the limit was
accumulated for future benefit adjustments which would otherwise
be less than the limit. No benefit was decreased below its origina l
amount.
This legislation , passed in 2013 , provided that prospectively
benefits would be increased annually based on a marginal rate
schedule. The increase is calculated as 1.25% on the first $60,000
of annual benefit and 0.15% on amounts above $60,000 of annual
benefit.
There were no changes in the OPSRP benefit provisions reflected since the December
31 , 2021 actuarial valuation .
This work product was prepared solely for Oregon Public Employees Retirement System for the
purposes staled herein and may not be appropriate lo use for other purposes. Milliman does not intend
to benefit and assumes no duty or liability to other parties who receive this work. Milliman recommends
that third parties be aided by their own actuary or other qualified professional when reviewing the
Millim;:1n work nrnrlur.t.
Statistical
Section
178 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RET IREMENT SYSTEM
-•-
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 179
STATISTICAL NOTES
The Statistical section presents detailed information as a context for understanding what the information in the
financial statements, note disclosures, and required supplementary information says about the System’s overall
financial health. The data presented was extracted from PERS’ information systems.
FINANCIAL TRENDS
These schedules contain trend information to help the reader understand how the System’s financial performance
and well-being have changed over time. Financial information is presented on an accrual basis.
The Schedules of Additions by Source, Deductions by Type, and Changes in Fiduciary Net Position are presented
on both a fiscal- and calendar-year basis. The System prepares its financial statements on a fiscal-year basis but
has its actuarial valuations performed on a calendar-year basis.
The Schedule of Earnings and Crediting at December 31 shows earnings available for crediting (net of
administrative expenses) and the rates approved by the PERS Board for the programs it administers.
The Schedule of Benefit Expenses by Type provides additional detail about benefit expenses for fiscal years
reported in the aggregate in the Schedules of Deductions by Type.
OPERATING INFORMATION
These schedules contain data to help illustrate how the information in the System’s financial reports relates to the
services the System provides and the activities it performs.
The S chedule  of Average OPEB Benefits for Retirement Health Insurance Account and Schedule of Average OPEB
Benefits for Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account show the average monthly other postemployment
healthcare benefits and the number of retirees receiving benefits under each plan.
The Schedule of Average Defined Benefit Pension Payments presents average monthly benefits, final average
salary, and number of retirees still receiving benefits by year of retirement.
The Schedule of Benefit Recipients by Benefit Type shows retired members by benefit level, benefit type, and
payment option selected.
The Schedule of Retirement System Membership shows demographics of membership over a period of time. The
fiscal year schedule shows membership over the last nine years. The calendar-year schedule is in five-year
increments going back to 1985.
The Schedule of Principal Participating Employers shows the 10 employers with the largest number of current
employees, along with aggregate information for the remaining employers with current employees.
The Schedule of Participating Employers lists all employers as of June 30, 2023, to show public employers of the
state of Oregon participating in PERS.
180 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Additions by Source - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dolla rs and Other Income Total
2014 $ 15,319,270 $ 915,236,878 10.54 % $ 9,886,700,639 $ 10,817,256,787
2015 13,785,439 1,123,256,703 12.25 2,364,479,372 3,501,521,514
2016 14,214,341 977,332,329 10.37 413,915,853 1,405,462,523
2017 13,177,984 1,022,201,249 10.18 7,660,055,575 8,695,434,808
2018 12,558,631 1,390,111,534 13.84 6,247,472,490 7,650,142,655
2019 11,354,366 1,720,183,341 16.21 4,010,048,029 5,741,585,736
2020 10,179,238 2,299,006,203 18.99 923,260,755 3,232,446,196
2021 160,309,347 2,161,450,927 17.67 18,998,415,630 21,320,175,904
2022 160,097,904 4,030,158,539 31.14                  789,784,656 4,980,041,099
2023 167,473,325 2,392,962,472 16.55                  2,904,087,715 5,464,523,512
Employee Pension Stability Accounts (included in Defined Benefit Pension Plan above)
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2021 $ 150,427,846 N/A N/A $ 22,744,173 $ 173,172,019
2022 152,691,859 N/A N/A 24,233,448 176,925,307
2023 158,831,428 N/A N/A 13,727,469 172,558,897
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2014 $ 527,303,202 N/A N/A $ 977,439,367 $ 1,504,742,569
2015 563,417,649 N/A N/A 276,949,224 840,366,873
2016 566,450,233 N/A N/A 76,509,002 642,959,235
2017 605,277,281 N/A N/A 948,360,842 1,553,638,123
2018 622,296,460 N/A N/A 772,501,114 1,394,797,574
2019 647,139,479 N/A N/A 565,351,952 1,212,491,431
2020 711,193,387 N/A N/A 242,628,243 953,821,630
2021 578,414,037 N/A N/A 2,560,936,405 3,139,350,442
2022 630,155,422 N/A N/A (218,607,143) 411,548,279
2023 692,611,666 N/A N/A 512,596,403 1,205,208,069
Deferred Compensation Plan
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2014 $ 92,174,335 N/A N/A $ 203,181,598 $ 295,355,933
2015 99,796,739 N/A N/A 48,617,428 148,414,167
2016 107,286,636 N/A N/A 3,166,856 110,453,492
2017 121,701,967 N/A N/A 189,041,478 310,743,445
2018 134,259,568 N/A N/A 169,577,769 303,837,337
2019 139,543,729 N/A N/A 104,963,768 244,507,497
2020 150,478,458 N/A N/A 73,406,068 223,884,526
2021 151,995,862 N/A N/A 630,011,342 782,007,204
2022 195,637,308 N/A N/A (348,864,446) (153,227,138)
2023 186,009,988 N/A N/A 285,740,030 471,750,018
Employer Contributions
Employer Contributions
Employer Contributions
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Employer Contributions
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 181
Deductions by Type - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Total
2014 $ 3,837,870,411 $ 31,247,350 $ 25,560,094 $ 3,894,677,855
2015 3,927,167,032 35,739,837 16,481,215 3,979,388,084
2016 4,193,307,712 40,567,225 13,154,578 4,247,029,515
2017 4,346,282,735 43,546,184 15,961,744 4,405,790,663
2018 4,642,717,844 37,751,319 13,876,294 4,694,345,457
2019 4,815,058,600 38,403,320 11,903,642 4,865,365,562
2020 5,045,931,154 52,083,371 18,855,297 5,116,869,822
2021 5,237,137,595 59,084,400 11,934,465 5,308,156,460
2022 5,468,215,109 58,696,368 14,893,205 5,541,804,682
2023 5,668,630,782 67,655,020 10,172,498 5,746,458,300
Employee Pension Stability Accounts (included in Defined Benefit Pension Plan above)
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Transfers Total
2021 $ -                              $ 480 $ -                          $ 480
2022 -                              528 18,089,202 18,089,730
2023 -                              528 21,284,064 21,284,592
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Total
2014 $ 330,535,801 $ 6,934,980 N/A $ 337,470,781
2015 319,978,740 7,565,611 N/A 327,544,351
2016 364,549,091 8,478,008 N/A 373,027,099
2017 417,119,098 9,481,014 N/A 426,600,112
2018 546,866,343 12,309,768 N/A 559,176,111
2019 490,459,364 12,568,466 N/A 503,027,830
2020 611,602,249 11,828,627 N/A 623,430,876
2021 577,899,925 12,827,760 N/A 590,727,685
2022 744,712,857 12,158,259 N/A 756,871,116
2023 661,979,840 14,037,830 N/A 676,017,670
Deferred Compensation Plan
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Total
2014 $ 89,652,030 $ 997,202 N/A $ 90,649,232
2015 84,177,564 1,018,468 N/A 85,196,032
2016 91,351,490 1,202,786 N/A 92,554,276
2017 97,089,531 1,330,947 N/A 98,420,478
2018 116,331,317 1,469,816 N/A 117,801,133
2019 123,057,988 2,278,273 N/A 125,336,261
2020 118,349,853 2,071,770 N/A 120,421,623
2021 136,614,998 2,419,306 N/A 139,034,304
2022 161,003,068 1,834,870 N/A 162,837,938
2023 164,423,617 2,108,236 N/A 166,531,853
182 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Changes in Fiduciary Net Position - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2014 $ 10,817,256,787 $ 3,894,677,855 $ 6,922,578,932 $ 58,478,913,732 $ 65,401,492,664
2015 3,501,521,514 3,979,388,084 (477,866,570) 65,401,492,664 64,923,626,094
2016 1,405,462,523 4,247,029,515 (2,841,566,992) 64,923,626,094 62,082,059,102
2017 8,695,434,808 4,405,790,663 4,289,644,145 62,082,059,102 66,371,703,247
2018 7,650,142,655 4,694,345,457 2,955,797,198 66,371,703,247 69,327,500,445
2019 5,741,585,736 4,865,365,562 876,220,174 69,327,500,445 70,203,720,619
2020 3,232,446,196 5,116,869,822 (1,884,423,626) 70,203,720,619 68,319,296,993
2021 21,320,175,904 5,308,156,460 16,012,019,444 68,319,296,993 84,331,316,437
2022 4,980,041,099 5,541,804,682 (561,763,583) 84,331,316,437 83,769,552,854
2023 5,464,523,512 5,746,458,300 (281,934,788) 83,769,552,854 83,487,618,066
Employee Pension Stability Accounts (included in Defined Benefit Pension Plan above)
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change
Beginning of Year1 End of Year
2021 $ 173,172,019 $ 480 $ 173,171,539 $ -                              $ 173,171,539
2022 176,925,307 18,089,730 158,835,577 173,171,539 332,007,116
2023 172,558,897 21,284,592 151,274,305 328,688,942 479,963,247
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2014 $ 1,504,742,569 $ 337,470,781 $ 1,167,271,788 $ 5,289,845,478 $ 6,457,117,266
2015 840,366,873 327,544,351 512,822,522 6,457,117,266 6,969,939,788
2016 642,959,235 373,027,099 269,932,136 6,969,939,788 7,239,871,924
2017 1,553,638,123 426,600,112 1,127,038,011 7,239,871,924 8,366,909,935
2018 1,394,797,574 559,176,111 835,621,463 8,366,909,935 9,202,531,398
2019 1,212,491,431 503,027,830 709,463,601 9,202,531,398 9,911,994,999
2020 953,821,630 623,430,876 330,390,754 9,911,994,999 10,242,385,753
2021 3,139,350,442 590,727,685 2,548,622,757 10,242,385,753 12,791,008,510
2022 411,548,279 756,871,116 (345,322,837) 12,791,008,510 12,445,685,673
2023 1,205,208,069 676,017,670 529,190,399 12,445,685,673 12,974,876,072
Deferred Compensation Plan
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2014 $ 295,355,933 $ 90,649,232 $ 204,706,701 $ 1,271,963,112 $ 1,476,669,813
2015 148,414,167 85,196,032 63,218,135 1,476,669,813 1,539,887,948
2016 110,453,492 92,554,276 17,899,216 1,539,887,948 1,557,787,164
2017 310,743,445 98,420,478 212,322,967 1,557,787,164 1,770,110,131
2018 303,837,337 117,801,133 186,036,204 1,770,110,131 1,956,146,335
2019 244,507,497 125,336,261 119,171,236 1,956,146,335 2,075,317,571
2020 223,884,526 120,421,623 103,462,903 2,075,317,571 2,178,780,474
2021 782,007,204 139,034,304 642,972,900 2,178,780,474 2,821,753,374
2022 (153,227,138) 162,837,938 (316,065,076) 2,821,753,374 2,505,688,298
2023 471,750,018 166,531,853 305,218,165 2,505,688,298 2,810,906,463
1 Beginning Net Position of Employee Pension Stability Account funds restated as of 7/1/2022.
Net Position
Net Position
Net Position
Net Position
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 183
Additions by Source - OPEB
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2014 N/A $ 48,253,398 0.56 % $ 56,194,217 $ 104,447,615
2015 N/A 53,648,437 0.59 15,606,876 69,255,313
2016 N/A 44,587,963 0.47 4,246,552 48,834,515
2017 N/A 49,785,501 0.50 57,566,224 107,351,725
2018 N/A 47,997,918 0.48 50,869,212 98,867,130
2019 N/A 49,615,345 0.47 35,959,368 85,574,713
2020 N/A 6,359,609 0.06 8,595,287 14,954,896
2021 N/A 2,963,356 0.02 171,822,210 174,785,566
2022 N/A 2,458,525 0.02 7,546,640 10,005,165
2023 N/A 2,138,751 0.01 25,157,762 27,296,513
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Fiscal Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2014 N/A $ 6,149,608 0.24 % $ 739,056 $ 6,888,664
2015 N/A 6,887,258 0.25 266,949 7,154,207
2016 N/A 10,966,837 0.39 228,057 11,194,894
2017 N/A 11,863,776 0.39 2,027,506 13,891,282
2018 N/A 13,290,145 0.45 2,383,184 15,673,329
2019 N/A 14,009,075 0.45 2,455,173 16,464,248
2020 N/A 11,241,801 0.32 772,391 12,014,192
2021 N/A 11,724,345 0.31 16,296,899 28,021,244
2022 N/A 8,264,936 0.20 764,731 9,029,667
2023 N/A 8,782,913 0.19 3,036,401 11,819,314
Covered Payroll
Employer Contributions
Employer Contributions
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
184 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Deductions by Type - OPEB
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits1  Expenses Refunds Total
2014 $ 34,112,567 $ 1,044,937 N/A $ 35,157,504
2015 31,922,820 1,279,427 N/A 33,202,247
2016 33,602,540       1,256,017 N/A 34,858,557
2017 31,186,802       1,288,059 N/A 32,474,861
2018 32,503,140       1,281,744 N/A 33,784,884
2019 32,234,400       1,312,229 N/A 33,546,629
2020 31,827,780       1,272,953 N/A 33,100,733
2021 31,334,950       1,287,002 N/A 32,621,952
2022 30,609,060       1,604,127 N/A 32,213,187
2023 29,793,960       1,651,347 N/A 31,445,307
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Fiscal Administrative
Year Benefits1  Expenses Refunds Total
2014 $ 4,925,743         $ 170,901             N/A $ 5,096,644
2015 4,230,808         188,598             N/A 4,419,406
2016 4,682,975         259,850             N/A 4,942,825
2017 4,327,944         285,895             N/A 4,613,839
2018 4,659,536         277,596             N/A 4,937,132
2019 4,486,752         318,425             N/A 4,805,177
2020 4,112,640         252,995 N/A 4,365,635
2021 3,672,820         292,231 N/A 3,965,051
2022 3,432,236         665,569 N/A 4,097,805
2023 3,007,586         741,986 N/A 3,749,572
Benefit payments paid by RHIA and RHIPA consisted of Healthcare Premium Subsidies
exclusively.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 185
Changes in Fiduciary Net Position - OPEB
For the Last Ten Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2014 $ 104,447,615 $ 35,157,504 $ 69,290,111 $ 317,583,603 $ 386,873,714
2015 69,255,313 33,202,247 36,053,066 386,873,714 422,926,780
2016 48,834,515 34,858,557 13,975,958 422,926,780 436,902,738
2017 107,351,725 32,474,861 74,876,864 436,902,738 511,779,602
2018 98,867,130 33,784,884 65,082,246 511,779,602 576,861,848
2019 85,574,713 33,546,629 52,028,084 576,861,848 628,889,932
2020 14,954,896 33,100,733 (18,145,837) 628,889,932 610,744,095
2021 174,785,566 32,621,952 142,163,614 610,744,095 752,907,709
2022 10,005,165 32,213,187 (22,208,022) 752,907,709 730,699,687
2023 27,296,513 31,445,307 (4,148,794) 730,699,687 726,550,893
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Fiscal
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2014 $ 6,888,664 $ 5,096,644 $ 1,792,020 $ 4,239,593 $ 6,031,613
2015 7,154,207 4,419,406 2,734,801 6,031,613 8,766,414
2016 11,194,894 4,942,825 6,252,069 8,766,414 15,018,483
2017 13,891,282 4,613,839 9,277,443 15,018,483 24,295,926
2018 15,673,329 4,937,132 10,736,197 24,295,926 35,032,123
2019 16,464,248 4,805,177 11,659,071 35,032,123 46,691,194
2020 12,014,192 4,365,635 7,648,557 46,691,194 54,339,751
2021 28,021,244 3,965,051 24,056,193 54,339,751 78,395,944
2022 9,029,667 4,097,805 4,931,862 78,395,944 83,327,806
2023 11,819,314 3,749,572 8,069,742 83,327,806 91,397,548
Net Position
Net Position
186 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Additions by Source - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Calendar Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2013 $ 18,664,061               $ 1,496,033,607                17.68 % $ 8,595,803,270        $ 10,110,500,938
2014 13,200,528               937,788,619                   10.48 4,342,718,450        5,293,707,597
2015 14,362,049               1,127,799,421                12.25 1,232,493,098        2,374,654,568
2016 13,085,105               976,297,293                   10.17 4,290,378,888        5,279,761,286
2017 14,668,384               1,179,420,962                10.77 9,343,076,932        10,537,166,278
2018 10,447,081               1,745,401,831                16.96 226,842,118           1,982,691,030
2019 11,373,682               2,019,260,325                18.27 8,608,031,425        10,638,665,432
2020 9,600,323                 2,094,082,795                17.72 5,070,001,230        7,173,684,348
2021 10,187,455               3,461,593,218                27.32 14,711,614,436      18,183,395,109
2022 8,399,524                 2,832,016,309                20.87 (1,569,734,668)       1,270,681,165
Employee Pension Stability Accounts
Calendar Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2020 $ 62,303,384               $ N/A    N/A $ 5,109,277               $ 67,412,661
2021 162,137,599             N/A    N/A 44,889,059             207,026,659
2022 153,839,722             N/A    N/A (7,147,877)              146,691,844
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Calendar Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2013 $ 542,566,655             N/A    N/A $ 814,928,040           $ 1,357,494,695
2014 511,048,423             N/A    N/A 450,087,155           961,135,578
2015 596,936,756             N/A    N/A 140,226,970           737,163,726
2016 597,188,543             N/A    N/A 518,172,223           1,115,360,766
2017 613,683,342             N/A    N/A 1,213,845,362        1,827,528,704
2018 638,930,679             N/A    N/A (61,712,368)            577,218,311
2019 687,121,432             N/A    N/A 1,247,407,081        1,934,528,513
2020 635,159,734             N/A    N/A 825,974,438           1,461,134,172
2021 600,925,794             N/A    N/A 1,887,877,326        2,488,803,120
2022 651,488,270             N/A    N/A (567,554,132)          83,934,138
Deferred Compensation Plan
Calendar Member Net Investment
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2013 $ 88,901,454               N/A    N/A $ 207,310,080           $ 296,211,534
2014 92,495,435               N/A    N/A 102,188,822           194,684,257
2015 97,373,493               N/A    N/A 15,087,160             112,460,653
2016 109,040,225             N/A    N/A 83,913,037             192,953,262
2017 120,454,924             N/A    N/A 212,359,507           332,814,431
2018 144,365,735             N/A    N/A 62,553,479             206,919,214
2019 144,923,289             N/A    N/A 217,040,897           361,964,186
2020 145,621,685             N/A    N/A 386,028,153           531,649,838
2021 167,423,263             N/A    N/A 286,846,437           454,269,699
2022 182,916,729             N/A    N/A (413,703,802)          (230,787,073)
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
Employer Contributions
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Employer Contributions
Employer Contributions
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Employer Contributions
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 187
Deductions by Type - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Calendar Administrative Intraccount
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Transfers Total
2013 $ 3,708,827,767         $ 34,271,919   $ 25,529,913   $ -                    $ 3,768,629,599
2014 3,888,166,333         35,187,183   17,850,587   -                    3,941,204,103
2015 4,068,416,728         37,333,754   15,932,985   -                    4,121,683,467
2016 4,248,984,127         41,936,746   14,931,267   -                    4,305,852,140
2017 4,495,375,698         41,149,466   14,404,077   -                    4,550,929,241
2018 4,737,604,779         36,802,183   13,668,587   -                    4,788,075,549
2019 4,908,681,141         44,666,591   10,664,553   -                    4,964,012,285
2020 5,137,911,088         56,720,875   17,513,367   (741,278)       5,211,404,052
2021 5,340,818,040         60,156,727   15,529,724   (9,927,633)    5,406,576,858
2022 5,584,370,250         61,736,752   14,218,421   (18,658,112)  5,641,667,310
Employee Pension Stability Accounts
Calendar Administrative Intraccount
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Transfers Total
2020 $ -                               $ 240               N/A $ 741,278        $ 741,518
2021 -                               504               N/A 9,927,633     9,928,137
2022 -                               -                N/A 18,658,112   18,658,112
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Calendar Administrative Intraccount
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Transfers Total
2013 $ 301,297,929            $ 7,164,598     N/A N/A $ 308,462,527
2014 332,722,945            7,315,352     N/A N/A 340,038,297
2015 343,688,428            7,746,075     N/A N/A 351,434,503
2016 386,689,618            9,106,820     N/A N/A 395,796,438
2017 497,309,999            9,958,373     N/A N/A 507,268,372
2018 508,929,082            13,454,299   N/A N/A 522,383,381
2019 545,539,814            12,321,208   N/A N/A 557,861,022
2020 655,602,622            12,255,726   N/A N/A 667,858,348
2021 708,475,122            12,572,339   N/A N/A 721,047,461
2022 691,335,584            13,705,078   N/A N/A 705,040,662
Deferred Compensation Plan
Calendar Administrative Intraccount
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Transfers Total
2013 $ 79,075,903              $ 982,625        N/A N/A $ 80,058,528
2014 92,995,075              998,023        N/A N/A 93,993,098
2015 82,398,740              1,050,769     N/A N/A 83,449,509
2016 81,073,521              1,374,662     N/A N/A 82,448,183
2017 101,419,280            1,390,830     N/A N/A 102,810,110
2018 131,272,865            1,483,023     N/A N/A 132,755,888
2019 120,101,006            2,705,025     N/A N/A 122,806,031
2020 129,947,918            2,007,705     N/A N/A 131,955,623
2021 145,991,333            2,154,367     N/A N/A 148,145,700
2022 148,180,097            2,622,092     N/A N/A 150,802,188
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
188 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Changes in Fiduciary Net Position - Retirement Programs
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions2 Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2013 $ 10,110,500,938       $ 3,768,629,599     $ 6,341,871,339     $ 55,821,546,984           $ 62,163,418,323
2014 5,293,707,597         3,941,204,103     1,352,503,494     62,163,400,642           63,515,904,136
2015 2,374,654,568         4,116,424,013     (1,741,769,445)    63,515,904,136           61,774,134,691
2016 5,279,761,286         4,305,852,140     973,909,146        61,774,134,691           62,748,043,837
2017 10,537,166,278       4,551,871,595     5,985,294,683     62,748,043,837           68,733,338,520
2018 1,982,691,030         4,788,075,549     (2,805,384,519)    68,733,338,520           65,927,954,001
2019 10,638,665,432       4,964,012,285     5,674,653,147     65,927,954,001           71,602,607,148
2020 7,173,684,348         5,211,404,052     1,962,280,296     71,602,607,148           73,564,887,444
2021 18,183,395,109       5,406,576,858     12,776,818,251   73,564,887,444           86,341,705,695
2022 1,270,681,165         5,641,667,310     (4,370,986,144)    86,341,705,695           81,970,719,551
Employee Pension Stability Account
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2020 $ 67,412,661              $ 741,518               $ 66,671,143          $ -                                   $ 66,671,143
2021 207,026,659            9,928,137            197,098,521        66,671,143                  263,769,664
2022 146,691,844            18,658,112          128,033,732        263,769,664                391,803,396
Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan
Individual Account Program
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2013 $ 1,357,494,695         $ 308,462,527        $ 1,049,032,168     $ 4,864,681,367             $ 5,913,713,535
2014 961,135,579            340,038,297        621,097,282        5,913,713,535             6,534,810,817
2015 737,163,726            351,434,503        385,729,223        6,534,810,817             6,920,540,040
2016 1,115,360,766         395,796,438        719,564,328        6,920,540,040             7,640,104,368
2017 1,827,528,704         507,268,372        1,320,260,332     7,640,104,368             8,960,364,700
2018 577,218,311            522,383,381        54,834,930          8,960,364,700             9,015,199,630
2019 1,934,528,513         557,861,022        1,376,667,491     9,015,199,630             10,391,867,121
2020 1,461,134,172         667,858,348        793,275,824        10,391,867,121           11,185,142,945
2021 2,488,803,120         721,047,461        1,767,755,659     11,185,142,945           12,952,898,604
2022 83,934,138              705,040,662        (621,106,524)       12,952,898,604           12,331,792,080
Deferred Compensation Plan
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2013 $ 296,211,535            $ 80,058,528          $ 216,153,007        $ 1,186,091,966             $ 1,402,244,973
2014 194,684,257            93,993,098          100,691,159        1,402,244,973             1,502,936,132
2015 112,460,653            83,449,509          29,011,144          1,502,936,132             1,531,947,276
2016 192,953,262            82,448,183          110,505,079        1,531,947,276             1,642,452,355
2017 332,814,431            102,810,110        230,004,321        1,642,452,355             1,872,456,676
2018 206,919,214            132,755,888        74,163,326          1,872,456,676             1,946,620,002
2019 361,964,186            122,806,031        239,158,155        1,946,620,002             2,185,778,157
2020 531,649,838            131,955,623        399,694,215        2,185,778,157             2,585,472,372
2021 454,269,699            148,145,700        306,124,000        2,585,472,372             2,891,596,372
2022 (230,787,073)          150,802,188        (381,589,261)       2,891,596,372             2,510,007,111
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
2Balances are restated for calendar years 2013 to 2015 due to prior period adjustments.
3Balances restated for calendar years 2013, 2014, and 2017 to correct amounts.
Net Position3
Net Position
Net Position
Net Position
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 189
Additions by Source - OPEB
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Calendar Mem ber Net Investm ent
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2013 N/A $ 47,729,940      0.59 % $ 46,420,994     $ 94,150,934
2014 N/A 49,466,294      0.56 25,754,870     75,221,164
2015 N/A 48,846,297      0.55 7,995,269       56,841,566
2016 N/A 48,339,520      0.59 31,003,380     79,342,900
2017 N/A 49,167,576      0.50 72,787,020     121,954,596
2018 N/A 49,483,717      0.48 1,768,069       51,251,786
2019 N/A 30,090,293      0.27 76,707,399     106,797,692
2020 N/A 3,000,272        0.03 46,001,641     49,001,913
2021 N/A 2,605,114        0.02 132,841,555   135,446,669
2022 N/A 2,162,912        0.02 (13,447,094)    (11,284,182)
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Calendar Mem ber Net Investm ent
Year Contributions Dollars and Other Income Total
2013 N/A $ 4,708,305        0.15 % $ 588,465          $ 5,296,770
2014 N/A 6,378,015        0.19 361,915          6,739,930
2015 N/A 8,747,711        0.24 131,852          8,879,563
2016 N/A 11,621,895      0.25 933,866          12,555,761
2017 N/A 12,646,688      0.40 2,915,300       15,561,988
2018 N/A 13,587,039      0.45 (36,367)           13,550,672
2019 N/A 12,766,276      0.37 5,311,670       18,077,946
2020 N/A 11,367,169      0.31 4,470,919       15,838,088
2021 N/A 10,144,057      0.26 13,179,625     23,323,682
2022 N/A 8,420,382        0.20 (1,488,040)      6,932,342
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
Covered Payroll
Percent of Annual
Covered Payroll
Employer Contributions
Employer Contributions
Percent of Annual
190 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Deductions by Type - OPEB
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Calendar Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Total
2013 $ 31,132,920            $ 1,095,853       N/A $ 32,228,773
2014 31,636,379            1,167,459       N/A 32,803,838
2015 32,273,928            1,223,215       N/A 33, 497,143
2016 32,385,680            1,206,654       N/A 33,592,334
2017 32,438,822            1,275,297       N/A 33,714,119
2018 32,422,620            1,374,059       N/A 33,796,679
2019 32,074,620            1,311,208       N/A 33,385,828
2020 31,655,700            1,277,801       N/A 32,933,501
2021 31,052,710            1,413,606       N/A 32,466,316
2022 30,288,780            1,640,873       N/A 31,929,653
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Calendar Administrative
Year Benefits  Expenses Refunds Total
2013 $ 4,323,159              $ 172,485          N/A $ 4,495,644
2014 4,615,612              180,524          N/A 4,796,136
2015 4,680,196              214,500          N/A 4, 894,696
2016 4,340,503              288,507          N/A 4,629,010
2017 4,578,655              273,005          N/A 4,851,660
2018 4,608,776              290,534          N/A 4,899,310
2019 4,365,646              297,957          N/A 4,663,603
2020 3,867,431              280,878          N/A 4,148,309
2021 3,553,564              436,931          N/A 3,990,495
2022 3,242,885              721,597          N/A 3,964,482
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 191
Changes in Fiduciary Net Position - OPEB
For the Last Ten Years Ended December 311:
Retirement Health Insurance Account
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2013 $ 94,150,934       $ 32,228,773      $ 61,922,161      $ 291,604,215        $ 353,526,376
2014 75,221,164       32,803,838      42,417,326      353,526,376        395,943,702
2015 56,841,566       33,497,143      23,344,423      395,943,702        419,288,125
2016 79,342,900       33,592,334      45,750,566      419,288,125        465,038,691
2017 121,954,596     33,714,119      88,240,477      465,038,691        553,279,168
2018 51,251,786       33,796,679      17,455,107      553,279,168        570,734,275
2019 106,797,692     33,385,828      73,411,864      570,734,275        644,146,139
2020 49,001,913       32,933,501      16,068,412      644,146,139        660,214,551
2021 135,446,669     32,466,316      102,980,354    660,214,551        763,194,905
2022 (11,284,182)      31,929,653      (43,213,834)     763,194,905        719,981,070
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Calendar
Year Additions Deductions Net Change Beginning of Year End of Year
2013 $ 5,296,770         $ 4,495,644        $ 801,126           $ 4,444,834            $ 5,245,960
2014 6,739,930         4,796,136        1,943,794        5,245,960            7,189,754
2015 8,879,563         4,894,696        3,984,867        7,189,754            11,174,621
2016 12,555,761       4,629,010        7,926,751        11,174,621          19,101,372
2017 15,561,988       4,851,660        10,710,328      19,101,372          29,811,700
2018 13,550,672       4,899,310        8,651,362        29,811,700          38,463,062
2019 18,077,946       4,663,603        13,414,343      38,463,062          51,877,405
2020 15,838,088       4,148,309        11,689,779      51,877,405          63,567,184
2021 23,323,682       3,990,495        19,333,187      63,567,184          82,900,371
2022 6,932,342         3,964,482        2,967,860        82,900,371          85,868,231
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are distributed as of December 31.
Net Position
Net Position
192 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Schedule of Earnings and Crediting
at December 311:
Calendar
Year
2013 15.76                    8.00 15.62 25.74                       15.59
2014 7.24                      7.75 7.24 2 4.29                         3 7.05
2015 1.87                      7.75                    1.87 (1.61) 1.85
2016 7.15                      7.50                    7.15                      8.76                         7.13
2017 15.23                    7.50                    15.23                    26.48                       14.72
2018 0.23                      7.20                    0.23                      (10.03)                      (0.63)
2019 13.27                    7.20                    13.27                    28.80                       13.35
2020 7.18                      7.20                    7.18                      11.77                       8.37
2021 20.14                    7.20                    20.14                    18,88 16.18
2022 (1.91)                    6.90                    (1.91)                     (21.52)                      (4.27)
1Calendar year-end information is provided because earnings are credited as of December 31.
2Earnings rate includes allocation from settlement of Murray v. PERB litigation.
3Earnings rate includes allocation from settlement of White, et al. v. PERB litigation.
Schedule of Benefit Expenses by Type -
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
For the Fiscal Years Ended June 30:
Disability Benefits Refunds
Fiscal Service Retirement Death
Year Benefits Duty  Non-Duty Benefit Totals Benefits Normal Death Total
2014 3,701,010,685$    17,739,646$       113,317,283$       3,832,067,614$       5,802,797$       13,614,833$       11,945,261$  3,863,430,505$
2015 3,790,050,384      17,943,338         113,129,130         3,921,122,852         6,044,180         7,283,720           9,197,495      3,943,648,247
2016 4,045,951,252      18,896,881         118,534,433         4,183,382,566         9,925,146         6,342,385           6,812,193      4,206,462,290
2017 4,204,153,060      18,965,495         118,479,583         4,341,598,137         4,684,598         6,589,962           9,371,782      4,362,244,479
2018 4,497,671,956      19,356,946         120,819,135         4,637,868,037         4,849,807         5,145,792           8,730,502      4,656,594,138
2019 4,666,793,109      20,360,781         123,821,174         4,810,975,064         4,083,536         3,356,265           8,547,377      4,826,962,242
2020 4,894,294,688      21,041,469         124,420,605         5,039,756,762         6,174,392         8,105,287           10,750,010    5,064,786,451
2021 5,084,114,373      21,560,657         126,540,003         5,232,215,032         4,922,561         4,721,963           7,212,502      5,249,072,058
2022 5,312,844,561      22,366,119         127,272,097         5,462,482,777         5,732,332         4,984,900           9,908,305      5,483,108,314
2023 5,513,738,363      23,575,973         127,225,545         5,664,539,881         4,090,901         1,284,335           8,888,163      5,678,803,280
Schedule of Average OPEB Benefits for Retirement Health Insurance Account1
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023:
Years Credited Service 8+
Average Monthly Benefit $60.00
Final Average Salary N/A
Number of Active Retirees 40,703
Schedule of Average OPEB Benefits for Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account1
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023:
Years Credited Service
8 - 9 10 - 14 15 - 19 20 - 24  25 - 29 30 + Total
Average Monthly Benefit 237$                   285$                     332$                        380$                 427$                   475$              446$
Final Average Salary N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Number of Active Retirees 1                         10                         17                            52                     118                     331                529
1 Effective years of retirement and final average salary are not available for OPEB.
Individual Account
Program
Tier One Earnings
Available for Crediting Tier TwoTier One
Credited
Variable Earnings/
(Loss) Credited
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 193
Schedule of Average Defined Benefit Pension Payments
0-5 6-10 11-15 16-20 21-25 26-30 31+ Total
2014 Average Monthly Benefit $831 $1,187 $1,559 $1,988 $2,762 $3,980 $5,823 $2,726
Final Average Salary $3,567 $3,656 $4,345 $5,006 $5,908 $6,402 $6,947 $5,306
Number of Active Retirees 383 1,001 1,092 1,195 1,398 1,217 918 7,204
2015 Average Monthly Benefit $682 $925 $1,387 $1,918 $2,581 $3,807 $5,690 $2,504
Final Average Salary $3,932 $3,822 $4,543 $5,180 $5,799 $6,559 $7,358 $5,427
Number of Active Retirees 287 814 975 1,090 1,134 1,087 639 6,026
2016 Average Monthly Benefit $775 $965 $1,363 $1,946 $2,569 $3,759 $5,666 $2,599
Final Average Salary $3,568 $3,818 $4,528 $5,221 $5,895 $6,830 $7,332 $5,550
Number of Active Retirees 328 837 981 1,110 1,229 1,288 798 6,571
2017 Average Monthly Benefit $742 $1,078 $1,428 $1,914 $2,695 $3,738 $5,713 $2,713
Final Average Salary $3,653 $3,863 $4,567 $5,444 $6,215 $7,028 $8,109 $5,841
Number of Active Retirees 367 888 1,066 1,182 1,164 1,367 1,035 7,069
2018 Average Monthly Benefit $834 $1,094 $1,382 $1,860 $2,684 $3,634 $5,400 $2,603
Final Average Salary $3,926 $3,994 $4,419 $5,435 $6,389 $7,077 $8,040 $5,867
Number of Active Retirees 348 935 1,042 1,330 1,209 1,488 949 7,301
2019 Average Monthly Benefit $869 $1,004 $1,311 $1,915 $2,733 $3,698 $5,267 $2,469
Final Average Salary $4,004 $3,949 $4,570 $5,599 $6,552 $7,408 $8,343 $5,906
Number of Active Retirees 406 962 1,007 1,202 1,106 1,263 732 6,678
2020 Average Monthly Benefit $827 $996 $1,241 $1,813 $2,765 $3,853 $5,157 $2,527
Final Average Salary $3,921 $4,160 $4,558 $5,462 $6,858 $7,935 $8,547 $6,150
Number of Active Retirees 396 889 1,095 1,139 1,259 1,224 887 6,889
2021 Average Monthly Benefit $721 $1,017 $1,274 $1,842 $2,729 $3,845 $4,990 $2,511
Final Average Salary $4,050 $4,120 $4,579 $5,709 $6,781 $8,036 $8,198 $6,169
Number of Active Retirees 397 836 909 1,112 1,243 1,164 808 6,469
2022 Average Monthly Benefit $762 $966 $1,221 $1,669 $2,726 $3,869 $4,919 $2,502
Final Average Salary $4,594 $4,426 $5,000 $5,597 $6,964 $8,196 $8,667 $6,453
Number of Active Retirees 378 932 1,089 1,196 1,371 1,318 982 7,266
2023 Average Monthly Benefit $820 $985 $1,250 $1,763 $2,727 $4,087 $4,849 $2,542
Final Average Salary $4,575 $4,533 $4,912 $5,763 $7,189 $8,791 $8,849 $6,635
Number of Active Retirees 411 887 850 986 1,274 1,157 838 6,403
Years of Credited ServiceRetirement Effective Dates
July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2023
194 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Schedule of Benefit Recipients by Benefit Type
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2023
Number of Refund
Retirees 1 2 3 4 5 Annuit y 1 2 3 4 1 2 3
$ 1-500 17,031 13,696 42 67 2,700 526 849 6,217 5,444 947 714 1,339 1,237 284
501-1,000 22,266 18,560 65 373 2,515 753 1,785 8,136 7,542 1,794 1,209 839 759 202
1,001-1,500 18,717 15,563 72 481 1,916 685 1,542 6,308 6,797 1,694 912 647 634 183
1,501-2,000 16,106 13,451 54 470 1,590 541 1,306 5,001 6,127 1,615 783 508 627 139
2,001-2,500 14,196 12,064 53 441 1,243 395 1,142 4,181 5,507 1,493 647 491 596 139
2,501-3,000 12,567 10,829 66 360 1,030 282 1,013 3,504 5,021 1,296 520 459 641 113
3,001-3,500 10,631 9,275 49 307 776 224 825 2,890 4,398 1,234 419 329 446 90
3,501-4,000 9,350 8,352 55 179 647 117 704 2,555 3,948 1,133 374 225 343 68
4,001-4,500 8,111 7,329 39 134 532 77 623 2,123 3,628 1,036 320 143 188 50
4,501-5,000 6,953 6,360 29 99 424 41 470 1,822 3,235 922 281 94 97 32
5,001-5,500 6,203 5,738 28 51 349 37 435 1,610 2,903 864 234 47 83 27
5,501-6,000 5,192 4,801 13 42 314 22 331 1,309 2,502 774 177 23 59 17
6,000+ 16,214 15,042 39 61 1,022 50 915 3,623 7,883 3,059 512 68 128 26
Totals 163,537 141,060 604 3,065 15,058 3,750 11,940 49,279 64,935 17,861 7,102 5,212 5,838 1,370
* Type of Retirement
** Annuity and Lump-Sum Options
1 - Normal 1 - No benefit for beneficiary
2 - Duty Disability 2 - Beneficiary receives same monthly benefit for life
3 - Non-Duty Disability 3 - Beneficiary receives half the monthly benefit for life
4 - Survivor Payment 4 - 15-year certain
5 - Alternate Payee
Amount
Type of Retirement * Annuity Options ** Lump-Sum Options **
Monthly
Benefit
Schedule of Retirement System Membership
at December 31:
Five Year Increments 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
State Agencies 37,824 46,187 45,068 42,434 38,076 48,018 47,331 50,261
School Districts 47,590 48,144 55,734 63,133 56,756 79,798 66,184 72,508
Political Subdivisions 26,238 33,177 40,635 53,291 50,085 65,332 54,662 57,889
Inactive Members 15,920 23,225 32,033 44,830 47,289 40,481 42,849 47,565
Total Non-Retired 127,572 150,733 173,470 203,688 192,206 233,629 211,026 228,223
Retired Members
and Beneficiaries 46,181 55,540 64,796 82,355 101,213 110,573 136,298 156,277
Total Membership 173,753 206,273 238,266 286,043 293,419 344,202 347,324 384,500
Administrative Expense1 $2,905,072 $8,901,091 $13,500,677 $24,358,550 $40,056,600 $38,029,071 $47,934,435 $72,956,312
Pension Roll (one month) $18,083,614 $33,175,888 $58,457,531 $122,467,087 $202,633,214 $265,490,496 $333,044,107 $408,717,504
1 Fiduciary Funds only.
Five Year Increments
Schedule of Retirement System Membership
at June 30:
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
State Agencies 47,620 47,868 48,099 48,320 49,699 49,506 51,340 50,782 53,300
School Districts 66,434 68,648 69,510 71,238 73,164 72,258 71,894 73,911 76,767
Political Subdivisions2 54,536 55,160 55,696 56,439 53,464 56,913 56,864 56,247 58,669
Inactive Members 44,786 45,925 45,709 45,993 48,786 46,530 48,384 51,814 53,100
Total Non-Retired 213,376 217,601 219,014 221,990 225,113 225,207 228,482 232,754 241,836
Retired Members
and Beneficiaries 132,506 136,435 136,435 145,863 149,386 153,622 156,500 160,326 163,537
Total Membership 345,882 354,036 355,449 367,853 374,499 378,829 384,982 393,080 405,373
Administrative Expense1 $45,791,942 $51,763,886 $55,931,659 $53,090,243 $54,880,713 $63,911,998 $75,910,699 $74,959,193 $86,194,363
Pension Roll (one month) $317,090,746 $337,405,252 $355,414,652 $376,397,537 $382,187,402 $399,447,944 $416,186,453 $432,881,154 $448,255,253
1 Fiduciary Funds only.
2 Includes Community Colleges
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 195
Schedule of Principal Participating Employers
Current Fiscal Year and Nine Years Ago
Number of Numb er of
Current Employees Rank Current Employees Rank
State of Oregon 53,300 1 28.24 % 45,774 1 27.75 %
Portland Public Schools 6,402 2 3.39 5,225 2 3.17
Portland, City of 5,710 3 3.03  4,398 6 2.67
Salem-Keizer Public Schools 5,604 4 2.97  4,669 3 2.83
Multnomah County 5,201 5 2.76  4,515 5 2.74
Beaverton School District 4,808 6 2.55 3,924 7 2.38
Oregon Health & Science University 3,683 7 1.95  4,582 4 2.78
Hillsboro School District #1J 2,489 8 1.32  2,287 8 1.39
North Clackamas School District #12 2,166 9 1.15 2,000 9 1.21
Eugene School District #4J 2,154 10 1.14 1,900 10 1.15
All Others* 97,219 51.51 85,700 51.96
Total 188,736 100.00 % 164,974 100.03 %
* “All Others” consisted of:
Counties 14,212 7.53 % 12,267 7.44 %
Municipalities 13,878 7.36 12,247 7.43
School Districts 53,144 28.17 44,819 27.17
Community Colleges 7,220 3.83 8,348 5.06
Other Political Subdivisions 8,765 4.64 8,019 4.86
Total All Others 97,219 51.51 % 85,700 51.96 %
Total System
Percent of Percent of
Total System
2023 2014
196 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
PERS-PARTICIPATING EMPLOYERS BY COUNTY,
ACCORDING TO MAILING ADDRESS (897)
Baker (11)
Baker City, City of
Baker County
Baker County Library District
Baker School District #5J
Baker Valley Irrigation District
Baker Web Academy
Burnt River High School
Burnt River Irrigation District
Huntington School District #16J
Huntington, City of
Pine-Eagle School District #61
Benton (15)
Adair RFPD
Adair Village, City of
Alsea School
Benton County
Corvallis School District #509J
Corvallis, City of
Kings Valley Charter School
Monroe Fire Department
Monroe School District #U
Monroe, City of
Muddy Creek Charter School
Oregon State University
Philomath Fire Department
Philomath School District #17 J
Philomath, City of
Clackamas (54)
Alliance Charter Academy
Canby Fire District
Canby School District
Canby Utility Board
Canby, City of
Cascade Heights Public Charter School
City County Insurance Services
Clackamas Community College
Clackamas County
Clackamas County ESD
Clackamas County Fair
Clackamas County Fire District 1
Clackamas County Vector Control
District
Clackamas Middle College
Clackamas River Water
Clackamas River Water Providers
Clackamas Web Academy
Colton Fire Department
Colton School District #53
Estacada Cemetery Maintenance
District
Estacada Fire Department
Estacada School District #108
Estacada, City of
Gladstone School District #115
Gladstone, City of
Happy Valley, City of
Harmony Academy
Hoodland Fire District #74
Housing Authority of Clackamas County
Lake Oswego School District
Lake Oswego, City of
Milwaukie , City of
Molalla RFPD #73
Molalla River Academy
Molalla River School District
Molalla , City of
Mulino Water District #23
North Clackamas County Water
Commission
North Clackamas School District #12
Oak Lodge Water Services District
Oregon City School District #62
Oregon City, City of
Oregon Trail School District #46
Renaissance Public Academy
Sandy Fire Department
Sandy, City of
South Fork Water Board
Springwater Environmental Sciences
School
Summit Learning Charter
Sunrise Water Authority
Three Rivers Charter School
West Linn School District
West Linn. City of
Wilsonville, City of
Clatsop (17)
Arch Cape Water/Sanitary District
Astoria, City of
Cannon Beach Academy
Cannon Beach RFPD
Cannon Beach, City of
Clatsop Community College
Clatsop County
Clatsop County School District #1C
Gearhart, City of
Jewell School District #8
Knappa School District #4
Knappa Svensen Burnside RFPD
Port of Astoria
Seaside Schools
Warrenton, City of
Warrenton-Hammond School District
Wickiup Water District
Columbia (27)
Clatskanie Library District
Clatskanie People's Utility District
Clatskanie RFPD
Clatskanie School District #6J
Clatskanie, City of
Columbia City, City of
Columbia County
Columbia County 911 Communications
District
Columbia Drainage Vector Control
District
Columbia River Fire and Rescue
Columbia River People's Utility District
Greater St. Helens Aquatic District
Mist-Birkenfeld RFPD
Port of Columbia County
Rainier Cemetery District
Rainier School District #13
Rainier, City of
Scappoose Public Library
Scappoose RFPD
Scappoose School District
Scappoose, City of
South Columbia Family School
St. Helens School District #502
St. Helens . City of
Vernonia Fire
Vernonia School District
Vernonia, City of
Coos (27)
Bandon School District
Bandon, City of
Central Coos Fire and Rescue
Charleston RFPD
Coos Bay School District #9
Coos Bay, City of
Coos County
Coos County Airport District
Coquille School District #8
Coquille, City of
Lakeside Water District
Lakeside, City of
Millington RFPD
Myrtle Point School District #41
Myrtle Point, City of
North Bay RFPD
North Bend City Housing Authority
North Bend Public Schools
North Bend, City of
Oregon Dungeness Crab Commission
Oregon Virtual Academy
Port of Coos Bay
Powers School District
Powers, City of
South Coast ESD Region #7
Southwestern Oregon Community
College
The Lighthouse School
Crook (7)
Crook County
Crook County RFPD 1
Crook County School District
Insight School of Oregon Painted Hills
Ochoco Irrigation District
Powell Butte Community Charter
School
Prineville, City of
Curry (13)
Brookings , City of
Brookings-Harbor School District #17C
Central Curry School District #1
Chetco Community Public Library
Board
Curry County
Curry Public Library
Gold Beach, City of
Harbor Water People 's Utility District
Nesika Beach-Ophir Water District
Oregon Trawl Commission
Port Orford Public Library District
Port Orford, City of
Port Orford-Langlois School District
#2CJ
Deschutes (27)
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 197
Bend Internat ional School
Bend Parks and Recreation
Bend. City of
Bend-La Pine Schoo ls
Black Butte Ranch Police
Black Butte Ranch RFPD
Central Oregon Commun ity College
Central Oregon Intergovernmental
Council
Central Oregon Irrigation Distr ict
Central Oregon Regiona l Housing
Authority
Cloverda le RFPD
Deschutes County
Deschutes Public Library District
Desert Sky Montesso ri
High Desert Educat ion Service Distr ict
Jefferson County Soil and Water
Conservat ion District
La Pine RFPD
Oregon Family Schoo l
Redmond Area Parks and Recreation
District
Redmond Fire and Rescue
Redmond Proficiency Academy
Redmond School Distr ict #2J
Redmond, City o f
Sisters and Camp Sherman RFPD
Sisters School District
Sisters, City of
Sunriver Service District
Doug las (39)
Camas Valley School District #21
Canyonville, City of
Days Creek School District #15
Doug las County
Doug las County ESD
Douglas County Fire District #2
Douglas County Soil and Water
Conservat ion District
Drain, City of
Elkton Schoo l District #34
Elkton, City of
Glenda le School District #77
Glide Fire Department
Glide Schoo l Distr ict #12
Myrtle Creek , City of
North Douglas County Fire and EMS
North Douglas School District #22
Oakland School District
Oakland , City of
Reedsport School District
Reedsport, City of
Riddle Schoo l District
Riddle, City of
Roseburg Public Schools
Roseburg Urban Sanita ry Autho rity
Roseburg , City of
South Umpqua School District
Sutherlin School District #130
Sutherlin Water Contro l District
Sutherlin , City of
The Phoenix School
Tri-City Water and Sanitary Autho rity
Umpqua Commun ity College
W inchester Bay Sanitary District
Winston, City of
Winston-D illard Fire District
Winston-Dillard Schools
Winston-D illard Water District
Yoncalla Schoo l District #32
Yoncalla, City of
Gilliam(6)
Arlington Public Schools
Condon Adm in. School District #25J
Condon, City of
Gilliam County
Gilliam County Fire Services
North Central ESD
Grant (13)
Canyon City, Town of
Dayvi lle Schoo l District #16J
Grant County
Grant County Emergency
Communications Agency
Grant County ESD
John Day School Distric t
John Day, City of
Long Creek Schools
Monument School District #8
Mount Vernon, City of
Oregon Connect ions Academy at
Prairie City
Prairie City School District #4
Prairie City, City of
Harney (17)
Burns, City of
Crane Elementary School
Crane Union High School
Diamond Schoo l District #7
Double O School District
Drewsey School
Frenchglen School District
Harney County
Harney County Schoo l District #3
Harney ESD Region #17
Harney Hospital
High Desert Parks and Recreat ion
District
Hines, City of
Pine Creek School
Silvies River Web Academy
South Harney School District #33
Suntex School District
Hood River (14)
Cascade Locks, City of
Crysta l Springs Water District
East Fork Irrigation District
Farmers Irriga tion District
Hood River County
Hood River County School Distr ict
Hood River, City of
Ice Founta in Water District
Odell Sanitary District
Parkdale Fire District
Port of Cascade Locks
Port of Hood River
West Side Fire Distr ict
Wy'East Fire District
Jackson (42)
Applegate Valley RFPD #9
Armadi llo Technical Institute
Ash land Parks Commission
Ash land Public Schools
Ash land, City of
Butte Falls School Distri ct
Butte Falls, Town of
Centra l Point School District #6
Centra l Point , City of
Crater Lake Charter Academy
Eagle Point Schoo l District #9
Eagle Point, City of
Evans Valley Fire District #6
Gold Hill, City of
Housing Author ity of Jackson County
Jackson County
Jackson County Fire Distr ict #3
Jackso n County Fire Distr ict #4
Jackson County Fire District #5
Jackson County Vecto r Contro l
Jacksonville, City of
Logos Public Charter School
Madrone Trail Public Charter School
Medford Irriga tion District
Medford School District #549C
Medford Water Commission
Medford , City of
Phoenix, City of
Phoenix-Talent School District #4
Pinehurst School
Prospect Schoo l District
River's Edge Academy Charter Schoo l
Rogue River Fire District
Rogue River School Distric t
Rogue River Valley Irrigat ion District
Rogue River, City of
Shady Cove, City of
Southern Oregon ESD
Southern Oregon University
Talent Irrigation District
Talent, City of
The Valley School of Southern Oregon
Jefferson (13)
Ashwood School
Black Butte School District
Crooked River Ranch RFPD
Culver School District #4
Culver, City of
Deschutes Valley Water District
Jefferson County
Jefferson County ESD
Jefferson County Library Distr ict
Lake Chinook Fire and Rescue District
Madras School District
Madras, City of
Meto lius, City of
Joseph ine (10)
Cave Junction, City of
Grants Pass Irrigation District
Grants Pass School District
Grants Pass, City of
Illinois Valley Fire Distr ict
Joseph ine County
Rogue Commun ity College
Sunny Wolf Charter Schoo l
Three Rivers Schoo l Distr ict
Woodland Charter School
Klamath (20)
Centra l Cascades Fire & EMS
Chiloquin, City of
Chiloquin -Agency Lake RFPD
Crescent RFPD
EagleRidge High School
Horsefly Irrigation District
198 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Keno RFPD
Klamath Commun ity College
Klamath County
Klamath County Emergency
Communicat ions District
Klamath County Fire District #1
Klamath County School District
Klamath Falls City Schools
Klamath Falls, City of
Klamath Housing Authority
Klamath Vecto r Contro l District
Malin, City of
Merrill, City of
Oregon Institute of Technology
South Suburban Sanitary District
Lake (9)
Adel School District #21
Lake County
Lake County ESD
Lake County Library Distric t
Lake County Schoo l Distr ict #7
Lakeview, Town of
North Lake Schoo l District #14
Paisley School Distric t
Plush Schoo l District
Lane (54)
Bethel School District
Blachly Schoo l District
Coburg Community Charter Schoo l
Coburg RFPD
Coburg, City of
Cottage Grove, City of
Creswell Schoo l District #40
Creswell, City of
Crow-Applegate-Lo rane Schoo l District
#66
Dexter RFPD
Dunes City, City of
Eugene School Distric t #4J
Eugene Water and Electric Board
Eugene , City of
Fern Ridge Community Library
Fern Ridge School District
Florence, City of
Junction City Fire Department
Junction City School District #69
Junction City, City of
Lane Community College
Lane Counci l of Governments
Lane County
Lane County ESD
Lane Fire Authority
Lane Regional Air Protection Agency
Lowell RFPD
Lowe ll School District
Lowell, City of
Mapleton Schoo l Distr ict
Mapleton Water Distri ct
Marcola School District #79
McKenzie Fire and Rescue
McKenzie School District
Mohawk Valley Fire
Oakridge School District
Oakridge, City of
Pleasant Hill Goshen Fire & Rescue
Pleasant Hill School District
Rainbow Water District
Ridgeline Montesso ri
Siuslaw Public Library
Siuslaw School Distric t #97 J
South Lane County Fire and Rescue
South Lane School District
Springfie ld School District #19
Springfield, City o f
TEACH-NW
The Village Schoo l
University of Oregon
Veneta, City o f
West Lane Technical Learning Center
Western Lane Fire and EMS Author ity
West fir, City of
Linco ln (19)
Central Oregon Coast Fire and Rescue
District
Depoe Bay RFPD
Depoe Bay, City of
Eddyvi lle Charter School
Linco ln City, City of
Linco ln County
Linco ln County School District
Newport, City of
North Lincoln Fire and Rescue Distr ict
#1
Orego n Coast Comm unity College
Port of Newport
Seal Rock RFPD
Seal Rock Water District
Siletz Valley School
Southwest Linco ln County Wate r
District
Toledo, City of
Waldport, City of
Yachats RFPD
Yachats, City of
Linn (37)
Albany , City of
Brownsville RFPD
Central Lin n School District #552C
Community Services Consortium
Greate r Albany Public Schools #BJ
Halsey, City of
Halsey-Shedd RFPD
Harrisburg Fire and Rescue
Harrisb urg School District #7
Harrisburg, City of
Lebanon Aquatic District
Lebanon Commu nity Schoo l District
Lebanon Fire District
Lebanon, City of
Linn County
Linn-Benton Comm unity College
Linn-Benton Housing Authori ty
Linn-Benton-Lincoln ESD
Lourdes Charte r School
Lyons Fire District
Lyons, City of
Mill City RFPD
Mill City, City of
Millersburg, City of
Oregon Cascades West Council of
Governments
Orego n Charter Academy
Sand Ridge Charter School
Santiam Canyon School District
Scio Fire District
Scio Schoo l District #95C
Sweet Home Cemetery Maintenance
District
Sweet Home Charte r School
Sweet Home Fire and Ambu lance
District
Sweet Home School Distric t #55
Sweet Home, City of
Tangen t RFPD
Willamette Connect ions Academy
Malheur (22)
Adrian School Dist rict #61
Annex Elementary School
Arock School District #81
Four Rivers Community School
Harper School District #66
Jordan Valley School Distr ict #3
Jordan Valley, City of
Juntura Grade School
Malheur County
Malheur ESD Region #14
Nyssa Road Assessment District #2
Nyssa Schoo l District #26
Nyssa, City of
Ontar io School District #BC
Ontario , City of
Owyhee Irrigation District
Rural Road Assessment District #3
Rural Road District #4
Treasu re Valley Communi ty College
Vale School District #84
Vale, City of
Valley View Cemete ry Maintenance
District
Marion (142)
App raiser Certification and Licensu re
Board
Arock School District #81
Aumsv ille RFPD
Aumsvil le, City of
Aurora RFPD
Aurora , City of
Board of Accountancy
Board of Architect Examiners
Board of Chiropractic Examiner s
Board of Examiners for Engineer ing
and Land Surveying
Board of Geolog ist Examiners
Board of Optomet ry
Board of Parole and Post-Prison
Supervisio n
Board of Pharmacy
Bureau of Labor and Indust ries
Cascade School District #5
Chemeketa Community College
Commiss ion on Indian Services
Commission on Judicial Fitness and
Disability
Constructio n Contrac tors Board
Department of Admin istrative Services
Department of Agriculture
Department of Aviation
Department of Consume r and Business
Services
Department of Corrections
Department of Educat ion
Department of Energy
Department of Environmenta l Quality
Department of Human Services
Department of Justice
Department of Land Conservat ion and
Development
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 199
Department of Military -Federal
Employees
Department of Revenue
Department of State Lands
Department of State Police
Depa rtme nt of Transportat ion
Department of Veterans' Affairs
District Attorneys Departme nt
Eagle Charter School
Employment Depa rtment
Employment Relations Board
Forestry Depart ment
Frontier Charter Academy
Geology and Mineral Indust ries
Gervais School District #1
Gervais, City of
Health Related Licensing Boards
Highe r Education Coord inating
Commission
Howa rd Stree t Charte r Schoo l, Inc.
Hubbar d RFPD
Hubbar d, City of
Idan ha-Detroit RFPD
Jefferson RFPD
Jefferson School District #14CJ
Jefferson. City of
Judges PERS
Judicial Departme nt
Keizer RFPD
Keizer, City of
Land Use Board of Appeals
Landscape Contractors Board
League of Oregon Cities
Legis lative Adminis tration Commit tee
Legis lative Assemb ly
Legis lative Committees
Legis lative Fiscal Off ice
Legis lative Policy and Research
Committee
Long Term Care Ombu dsman
Marion Area Multi-Agency Emergency
Telecom Center
Marion County
Marion County Fire District #1
Marion County Housing Autho rity
Menta l Health Regulatory Agency
Military Departmen t
Mount Angel Fire District
Mount Angel School District #91
Mount Angel, City of
North Santiam Schoo l Distr ict #29J
Northwest Senior and Disability
Services
Office of Legislative Counsel
Office of the Governor
Office of the State Treasurer
Orego n Advocacy Commissions Office
Oregon Board of Dentist ry
Oregon Board of Massage Therapists
Orego n Board of Medica l Examiners
Oregon Business Development
Department
Oregon Commission for the Blind
Oregon Community College Assoc iation
Orego n Corrections Enterp rises
Oregon Criminal Justice Commission
Orego n Departmen t of Emergency
Management
Orego n Departm ent of Fish and
Wildlife
Oregon Forest Resources Institute
Orego n Governmen t Ethics Com mission
Orego n Health Authority
Orego n Hop Commission
Oregon Housing and Commun ity
Services
Orego n Liquor & Cannabis Commission
Orego n Municipal Electric Utilities
Association
Oregon Parks and Recreation
Departmen t
Orego n Patient Safety Commission
Oregon Racing Comm ission
Orego n School Boards Association
Orego n State Board of Nursing
Orego n State Library
Orego n Watershed Enhancement
Board
Orego n Youth Authority
Psychiat ric Security Review Board
Public Defense Services Commission
Public Employees Retirement System
Public Safety Standards and Training
Public Utility Commission
Real Estate Agency
Salem Housing Authority
Salem, City of
Salem-Keizer Public Schoo ls
Secretary o f State
Silver Falls Library District
Silver Falls School Distr ict
Silverton RFPD #2
Silverton, City of
St. Paul School District
State Accident Insurance Fund
State Board of Clinical Social Workers
State Board of Tax Practitioners
State Lottery Commission
State Marine Board
Stayton RFPD
Stayton, City of
Sublimity RFPD
Suburban East Salem Water District
Teache r Standards and Practices
Commission
Travel Information Council
Turner Fire District
Turner, City of
Valley Inquiry Charter School
Water Resources Depa rtment
Willamette ESD
Woodburn Fire Distr ict
Woodburn School District
Woodburn, City of
Morrow (10)
Boardman RFPD
Boardman, City of
Commun ity Counseling Solutions
Heppner, City of
Irrigon, City of
Morrow County
Morrow County Schools
North Morrow Vecto r Control District
Orego n Trail Library Distr ict
West Extens ion Irrigatio n District
Multnomah (48)
Arthur Academy Charte r School
Centennia l School District #28
Center for Advanced Learning
Corbett School Distric t #39
Corbe tt Water District
David Doug las Schoo l Dist rict
Fairview, City of
Gresham, City of
Gresham-Barlow School Distri ct #10
HOLLA Schoo l
Home Forward
Kairos PDX
Knova Learning Oregon
Le Monde French Immersion Public
Charter School
Lewis and Clark Montessori Charter
School
Metro
Metro East Web Academy
Mount Hood Commun ity College
Multno mah County
Mult nomah County Drainage District
Mult nomah County RFPD #14
Multno mah ESD
Multnomah Learning Academy
Oregon Beef Council
Oregon Film and Video
Orego n Health and Science University
Oregon Potato Commiss ion
Oregon Tour ism Commission
Oregon W heat Commission
Parkrose School District
Physical Therapist Licensing Board
Port of Portland
Portland Community College
Portland Development Commission
Portland Public Schools
Portland State University
Portland Village Schoo l
Portland. City of
Reynolds Schoo l District
Riverdale Schoo l
Rockwood Water People's Utili ty
District
Sauvie Island Schoo l
The Cottonwoo d School of Civics and
Science
The Emerson Schoo l
The Ivy Schoo l
Troutdale, City of
West Multn omah Soil and Wate r
Conservation District
Wood Village, City of
Polk (16)
Centra l School Distr ict #13J
Dallas Community School
Dallas School District
Dallas, City of
Falls City Schoo l District
Falls City, City of
Independence , City of
Luckiam ute Valley Charter Schoo l
Monmouth , City of
Perrydale School District #21
Polk County
Polk County Fire District #1
Polk Soil and Wate r Conservat ion
District
Southwestern Polk Coun ty RFPD
West Valley Housing Authority
Western Orego n Universit y
Sherman (3)
Moro, City of
200 | Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Participation of employers in defined benefit and other postemployment benefit plans:
Defined Benefit Pension Plan – all 897 employers participate.
RHIA OPEB Plan – all 897 employers participate.
RHIPA OPEB Plan – all 108 state agency employers participate.
Sherman County
Sherman County School District
Tillamook (26)
Bay City, City of
Fairview Water District
Garibaldi, City of
Manzanita, City of
Neah-Kah-Nie School District
Nehalem Bay Fire and Rescue
Nehalem Bay Health District
Nehalem Bay Wastewater Agency
Neskowin Regional Sanitary Authority
Neskowin Regional Water District
Nestucca RFPD
Nestucca Valley School District #101
Netarts Water District
Netarts-Oceanside RFPD
Netarts-Oceanside Sanitary District
Port of Garibaldi
Port of Tillamook Bay
Rockaway Beach , City of
Tillamook Bay Community College
Tillamook County Emergency
Communications District
Tillamook County Soil and Water
Conservation District
Tillamook Fire District
Tillamook People's Utility District
Tillamook Public Schools
Tillamook, City of
Wheeler, City of
Umatilla (30)
Athena, City of
Athena-Weston School District #29RJ
Blue Mountain Community College
Echo School District
Echo , City of
Helix School District
Hermiston, City of
lnterMountain ESD
lone School District
Milton-Freewater Unified School District
Milton-Freewater, City of
Nixyaawii Community School
Pendleton School District #16R
Pendleton, City of
Pilot Rock School District #2R
Pilot Rock, City of
Port of Umatilla
Stanfield School District
Stanfield, City of
Ukiah School
Umatilla County
Umatilla County Fire District #1
Umatilla County Soil and Water District
Umatilla County Special Library District
Umatilla Fire Department
Umatilla School District #6R
Umatilla, City of
Umatilla-Morrow Radio and Data
District
Wallowa County Region #18 ESD
Weston, City of
Union (14)
Cove School District
Eastern Oregon University
Elgin School District #23
Elgin, City of
Imbler RFPD
Imbler School District
Imbler , City of
La Grande Public Schools
La Grande, City of
North Powder School District
North Powder, City of
Northeast Oregon Housing Authority
Tri-County Cooperative Weed
Management Area
Union County School District
Wallowa (9)
Enterprise School District #21
Enterprise , City of
Joseph School District #6
Joseph, City of
Troy School District #54
Wallowa County
Wallowa County Region #18 ESD
Wallowa School
Wallowa, City of
Wasco (17)
Columbia Gorge Community College
Columbia Gorge ESD
Dufur Schools
Dufur, City of
Maupin, City of
Mid-Columbia Center for Living
Mid-Columbia Fire and Rescue
Mosier Community School
Mosier Fire District
North Central Public Health District
North Wasco County Parks and
Recreation
North Wasco County School District
#21
Northern Oregon Corrections
Port of The Dalles
South Wasco County School District #1
Wasco County
Wasco County Soil and Water
Conservation District
Washington (39)
Arco Iris Spanish Immersion Charter
School
Banks Fire District #13
Banks School District
Banks, City of
Beaverton School District
Beaverton, City of
City View Charter School
Clean Water Services
Cornelius, City of
Durham, City of
Forest Grove Community School
Forest Grove School District
Forest Grove, City of
Gaston Public Schools
Gaston RFPD
Gaston, City of
Hillsboro School District #1J
Hillsboro, City of
Hope Chinese Charter School
King City, City of
Metropolitan Area Communication
Commission
MITCH Charter School
North Plains, City of
Northwest Regional ESD
Oregon Dairy Products Commission
Oregon State Bar
Oregon State Bar Professional Liability
Fund
Sherwood Charter School
Sherwood School District #88J
Sherwood, City of
Tigard, City of
Tigard-Tualatin School District #23J
Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue
Tualatin Valley Irrigation District
Tualatin Valley Water District
Tualatin, City of
Washington County
Washington County Consolidated
Communications Agency
West Slope Water District
Wheeler (4)
Fossil School District #21J
Fossil, City of
Mitchell School
Spray School District #1
Yamhill (26)
Amity Fire District
Amity School District
Amity, City of
Carlton, City of
Dayton Public Schools
Dayton, City of
Dundee, City of
Eola Hills Charter School
Lafayette , City of
McMinnville Schools
McMinnville Water and Light
Department
McMinnville, City of
New Carlton Fire District
Newberg School District #29JT
Newberg, City of
Sheridan AIIPrep Academy
Sheridan Fire District
Sheridan School District #48J
Sheridan, City of
Willamina School District #30J
Willamina, City of
Yamhill Communications Agency
Yamhill County
Yamhill Fire Protection District
Yamhill, City of
Yamhill-Carlton School District #1
Key Acronyms
RFPD = Rural Fire Protection District
ESD = Education Service District
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2023) | 201
OREGON
PERS
PUBLIC EMPLOY EES RETIREMENT SYSTEM
-•-