Columbia River Gorge Commission
Financial Statement Audit:
July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022
April 2023
2023-14
Interstate Cooperative Agreement with Washington
State Office of State Auditor
Office of the Secretary of State Audits Division
Shemia Fagan Kip R. Memmott, MA, CGAP, CRMA
Secretary of State Director
Cheryl Myers 255 Capitol St. NE, Suite 500
Deputy Secretary of State, Tribal Liaison Salem, OR 97310
503-986-2255
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
Board of Commissioners
Columbia River Gorge Commission
In accordance with the Interstate Cooperative Agreement between the Washington State
Auditor’s Office and the Oregon Secretary of State Audits Division, we performed
procedures to verify Oregon’s share of the Columbia River Gorge Commission’s joint
expenditures and Commissioners’ compensation are in compliance with laws and
regulations of the State of Oregon.
The Washington State Auditor’s Office performed an audit of the Columbia River Gorge
Commission and prepared Independent Auditors’ Reports on the Commission’s financial
statement and on internal control over financial reporting as of and for the year ended June
30, 2022.
The Oregon Audits Division is issuing these reports as a matter of public information for
the taxpayers of Oregon. Likewise, the Washington State Auditor’s Office has issued the
reports for public use in the State of Washington.
State of Oregon
April 4, 2023
Published March 30, 2023
Report No. 1032246
Find out what’s new at SAO
by scanning this code with
your smartphone’s camera
Financial Statement Audit Report
Columbia River Gorge
Commission
For the period July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022
Insurance Building, P.O. Box 40021  Olympia, Washington 98504-0021  (564) 999-0950  Pat.McCarthy@sao.wa.gov
Office of the Washington State Auditor
Pat McCarthy
March 30, 2023
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
Report on Financial Statement
Please find attached our report on the Columbia River Gorge Commission’s financial statement.
We are issuing this report in order to provide information on the Commission’s specific financial
activity.
Sincerely,
Pat McCarthy, State Auditor
Olympia, WA
Americans with Disabilities
In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, we will make this document available in
alternative formats. For more information, please contact our Office at  (564) 999 -0950, TDD
Relay at (800) 833-6388, or email our webmaster at webmaster@sao.wa.gov.
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Independent Auditor's Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and on Compliance
and Other Matters Based on an Audit of the Financial Statement Performed in Accordance with
Government Auditing Standards ..................................................................................................... 4
Independent Auditor's Report on the Financial Statement ............................................................. 6
Financial Section ............................................................................................................................. 9
About the State Auditor's Office ................................................................................................... 13
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance and Other
Matters Based on an Audit of the Financial Statement Performed in Accordance with
Government Auditing Standards
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in  Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the Statement of Expenditures
– Budget and Actual – General Fund of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, as of and for the
year ended June 30, 2022, and the related notes (the financial statement) and have issued our report
thereon dated March 23, 2023.
REPORT ON I NTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL
REPORTING
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statement, we considered the Commission’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial
statement, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Commission’s internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of
the Commission’s internal control.
A deficiency in internal control  exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow
management or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent,
or detect and correct, mi sstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a
combination of deficiencies, in internal control such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of the Commission’s financial statement will not be prevented, or detected
and corrected on a timely basis. A significant deficiency  is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a material weakness, yet important enough
to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described above and was not
designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material weaknesses or
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
significant deficiencies and therefore, material weaknesses or significan t deficiencies may exist
that were not identified.  Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses.
REPORT ON COMPLIAN CE AND OTHER MATTERS
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Commission’s financial statement are
free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of
laws, regulations, contracts and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct
and material effect on the financial statement. However, providing an opinion on compliance with
those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an
opinion.  The results of our tests disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are
required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and
compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Commission’s inte rnal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit
performed in accordance with Government Auditing Standards in considering the Commission’s
internal control and compliance. Accordingly, this communication is not s uitable for any other
purpose. However, this report is a matter of public record and its distribution is not limited. It also
serves to disseminate informat ion to the public as a reporting tool to help citizens assess
government operations.
Pat McCarthy, State Auditor
Olympia, WA
March 23, 2023
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’ S REPORT
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statement
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022
Krystyna Wolniakowski
Columbia River Gorge Commission
White Salmon, Washington
REPORT ON THE  AUDIT OF THE  FINANCIAL STATEMENT
Opinion
We have audited the accompanying Statement of Expenditures – Budget and Actual – General
Fund of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, for the year ended June 30, 2022, and the related
notes (the financial statement), as listed in the financial section of our report.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statement referred to above present s fairly, in all
material respects, the budget and actual expenditures of the Columbia River Gorge Commission,
for the year ended June 30, 2022 in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
Basis for  Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United
States of America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards , issued by the Comptroller General of the Uni ted States. Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor ’s Responsibilities for
the Audit of the Financial Statement section of our report. We are required to be independent of
the Commission and to meet our other ethical  responsibilities, in accordance with the relevant
ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is
sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion .
Responsibilit ies of Management  for the Financial Statement
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of this financial statement in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and for
the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and
fair presentation of a financial statement that is free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error.
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
In preparing the financial statement, manage ment is required to evaluate whether there are
conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the
Commission’s ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months beyond the financial
statement date, including any currently known information that may raise substantial doubt shortly
thereafter.
Auditor’s Responsibilit ies for the Audit of the Financial Statement
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statement as a whole
is free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report
that includes our  opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high lev el of assurance but is not absolute
assurance and therefore is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS and
Government Auditing Standards  will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The
risk of not detecting a material  misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting
from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or
the override of internal control. Misstatements are considered material if there is a sub stantial
likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would influence the judgment made by a
reasonable user based on the financial statement.
Performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards includes the
following responsibilities:
• Exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit;
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statement, whether
due to fraud or error, and design and perform audit proce dures responsive to those risks.
Such procedures include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statement;
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the effectiveness of the Commission’s internal control. Accordingly, no such
opinion is expressed;
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies use d and the reasonableness of
significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall
presentation of the financial statement;
• Conclude whether, in our judgment, there are conditions or events, considered in the
aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Commission’s a bility to continue as a
going concern for a reasonable period of time; and
• Communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit, significan t audit findings, and certain internal
control-related matters that we identified during the audit.
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
OTHER REPORTING REQUIRED BY GOVERNMENT AUDITING
STANDARDS
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards , we have also issued our report dated
March 23, 2023 on our consideration of the Commission’s internal control over financial reporting
and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts and grant
agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is to describe the scope of our testing of
internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to
provide an opinion on  the effectiveness of the Commission’s internal cont rol over financi al
reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance
with Government Auditing Standards  in considering the Commission’s internal control over
financial reporting and compliance.
Pat McCarthy, State Auditor
Olympia, WA
March 23, 2023
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
FINANCIAL SECTION
Columbia River Gorge Commission
July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022
BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENT
Statement of Expenditures – Budget and Actual – General Fund – 2022
Notes to the Financial Statement – 2022
2021-2023 YR1 Actual Exp. YR2 Actual Exp.
General Fund: Budget June 30, 2022 June 30, 2023
Other Private/Local Expenditures
Klickitat County -  -  -
Donations -  -  -
Total Other -  -  -
Washington Expenditures:
Joint Operating 1,161,000            552,996 -
Klickitat County 191,000 96,330
Commissioners 32,000 8,430
Access Database Replacement 213,000 77,591
Total Washington 1,597,000            735,347 -
Oregon Expenditures:
Joint Operating 1,161,000            552,994
Commissioners 29,296 10,090
Access Database Replacement 213,000 77,590
Total Oregon 1,403,296            640,674 -
Total Agency 3,000,296 1,376,021 -
Summary
Washington & Oregon Joint 2,322,000            1,105,990 -
Washington Commissioners 32,000 8,430 -
Oregon Commissioners 29,296 10,090 -
Klickitat County 191,000 96,330 -
Washington Access Database Replacement 213,000 77,591
Oregon Access Database Replacement 213,000 77,590
Other Private/Local -  -  -
Total Agency 3,000,296 1,376,021 -
Less Oregon Commissioners 29,296 10,090 -
Total on Washington AFRS Reports 2,971,000 1,365,931 -
General Fund
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Columbia River Gorge Commission
Washington State Agency #460
Oregon State Agency #350
Statement of Expenditures - Budget and Actual
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this statement.
Columbia River Gorge Commission
Washington State Agency No. 460
Oregon State Agency No. 350
Notes to the Financial Statement
For the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
T
he accompanying Statement of Expenditures -Budget and Actual of the Columbia River Gorge
Commission has been prepared to meet the requirements of the Columbia River Gorge Compact and the
Interstate Cooperative Agreement between the Washington State Office of State Auditor and the Oregon
Secretary of State, Audits Division.  The Statement of Expenditures -Budget and Actual is not intended to
be a complete presentation of the commission’s assets, liabilities, and revenues nor does it constitute a
complete set of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  The
more significant of the state’s accounting policies are as follows:
A
. R
eporting Entity
T
he commission is a regional agency authorized by Congress through the Columbia River Gorge National
Scenic Area Act (PL 99-663) and created by the states of Washington and Oregon by interstate compact.
The commission is comprised of 12 members from the two states and one member appointed by the US
Secretary of Agriculture.  Its primary role involves planning, consulting, and oversight in the implementation
of the federal legislation.  The commission has an authorized staff level of 8.0 FTEs.
B
. M
easurement Focus and Basis of Accounting
T
he commission uses the general fund to account for all of Columbia River Gorge Commission’s general
activities. The accounting and financial reporting treatment applied to a fund is determined by its
measurement focus.  The general fund is accounted for using a current financial resources measurement
focus.  With this measurement focus , only current assets and current liabilities generally are included on
the balance sheet.  Operating statements for this fund present increases (i.e., revenues and other financial
sources) and decreases (i.e., expenditures and other financing uses) as changes in net current assets.
T
he modified accrual basis of accounting is used by the general fund.  Under the modified accrual basis of
accounting, revenues are recognized when susceptible to accrual (i.e., when they become both measurable
and available).  “Measurable” means the amount of the transaction can be reasonably estimable.
“Available” means collectible within the current period or soon enough thereafter to be used to pay liabilities
of the current period.
U
nder modified accrual accounting, expenditures are recognized when the related fund liability is incurred,
if measurable.  Exceptions to the general modified accrual expenditure recognition criteria include
unmatured interest on general long-term indebtedness which are recognized when due and compensated
absences which are recognized when paid.
C
. G
eneral Budgetary Policies and Procedures
T
he legal level of budgetary control is at the fund/account, agency and appropriation level, with
administrative controls established at lower levels of detail in certain instances.  Annual budgets are
established at the states’  legislative level thro ugh an allotment process.  Funding is provided by
appropriations from the states of Washington and Oregon.
C
ommissioner compensation, including travel, is paid directly, and accounted for separately, by each state.
Washington State has funded one position to support land use planning for Klickitat County, Washington,
which is accounted for separately by Washington. All other commission expenditures are joint expenditures,
which are shared equally by both states.  These expenditures are processed, paid, and accounted for by
the states of Washington and Oregon.  Oregon reimburses Washington for its 50 percent share.
D
. C
ompensated Absences
A
nnual Leave and Sick Leave
Commission employees accrue vested annual leave at a variable rate based on years of service.  In
general, accrued annual leave cannot exceed 30 days at the employee’s anniversary date.
E
mployees accrue sick leave at the rate of one day per month without limitation on the amount that can be
accumulated.  Sick leave is not vested; i.e., the commission does not pay employees for unused sick leave
upon termination except upon employee death or retirement.  At death or retirement, the commission is
liable for 25 percent of the employee’s accumulated sick leave.  In addition, the commission has a “sick
leave buyout option” in which each January, employees who accumulate sick leave in excess of 60 days
may redeem sick leave earned but not taken during the previous year at the rate of one day’s pay in
exchange for each four days of sick leave.    Accordingly, the general fund recognizes sick leave when it is
paid.
N
ote 2 - Retirement System
C
ommission employees are currently members of the Washington state retirement system.  (Actuarial and
other information of this system can be found in the Washington State Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report.)
Office of the Washington State Auditor sao.wa.gov
ABOUT THE STATE A UDITOR’S OFFICE
The State Auditor’s Office is established in the Washington State Constitution and is part of the
executive branch of state government. The State Auditor is elected by the people of Washington
and serves four-year terms.
We work with state agencies, local governments and the public to achieve our vision of increasing
trust in government by helping governments work better and deliver higher value.
In fulfilling our mission to provide citizens with independent and transparent examinations of how
state and local governments use public funds, we hold ourselves to those same standards by
continually improving our audit quality and operational efficiency, and by developing highly
engaged and committed employees.
As an agency, the State Auditor’s Office has the independence necessary to objectively perform
audits, attestation engagements and investigations. Our work is designed to comply with
professional standards as well as to satisfy the  requirements of federal, state and local laws. The
Office also has an extensive quality control program and undergoes regular external peer review
to ensure our work meets the highest possible standards of accuracy, objectivity and clarity.
Our audits look at financial information and compliance with federal, state and local laws for all
local governments, including schools, and all state agencies, including institutions of higher
education. In addition, we conduct performance audits and cybersecurity audi ts of state agencies
and local governments, as well as state whistleblower, fraud and citizen hotline investigations.
The results of our work are available to everyone through the more than 2,000 reports we publish
each year on our website, www.sao.wa.gov. Additionally, we share regular news and other
information via an email subscription service and social media channels.
We take our role as partners in accountability seriously. The Office provides training and technical
assistance to governments both directly and through partnerships with other governmental support
organizations.
Stay connected at sao.wa.gov
 Find your audit team
 Request public records
 Search BARS Manuals (GAAP and
cash), and find reporting templates
 Learn about our training workshops
and on-demand videos
 Discover which governments serve you
— enter an address on our map
 Explore public financial data
with the Financial Intelligence Tool
Other  ways to stay in touch
 Main telephone:
(564) 999-0950
 Toll-free Citizen Hotline:
(866) 902-3900
 Email:
webmaster@sao.wa.gov
This report is intended to promote the best possible
management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 500
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits