OREGON PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Re
tiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment
Benefits (OPEB) Plan
Schedule of OPEB Amounts
A
s of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
OREGON PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits
(OPEB) Plan Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
T
able of Contents
P
age
I
ndependent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Sc
hedule of OPEB Amounts ..............................................................................................................................................4
N
otes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts.................................................................................................................... 5
Macias Gini & O’Connell LLP
500 Capitol Mall, Suite 2200
Sacramento, CA 95814
www.mgocpa.com
Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
To the Public Employees Retirement Board of the
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Tigard, Oregon
Report on the Audit of the Schedule
Opinions
We have audited the columns titled net OPEB (asset), total deferred outflows of resources, total
deferred inflows of resources, and total OPEB (credit) (specified column totals) included in the
accompanying schedule of Other Postemployment Benefits (OPEB) amounts (schedule) of the
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System (System) Retiree Health Insurance Premium
Account Single-Employer OPEB Plan (Plan), as of and for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, and
the related notes.
In our opinion, the accompanying sche dule referred to above presents fairly, in all material
respects, the net OPEB (asset), total deferred outflows of resources, total deferred inflows of
resources, and total OPEB (credit) of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement System Retiree
Health Insurance Premium Account Single -Employer OPEB Plan, as of and for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 2022, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
Basis for Opinions
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United
States of America (GAAS). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Schedule section of our report. We are required to
be independent of the System, and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in accordance with
the relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence we
have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinions.
Responsibilities of Management for the Schedule
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the schedule in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and
for the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation
and fair presentation of the schedule that is free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Schedule
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether t he specified column totals
included in the schedule of OPEB amounts are free from material misstatement, whether due to
fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinions. Reasonable assurance
is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance and therefore is not a guarantee that an
audit conducted in accordance with GAAS will always detect a material misstatement when it
exists. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for
one r esulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Misstatements are considered material if
there is a substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate,  they would influence the
judgment made by a reasonable user based on the specified column totals included in the
schedule of OPEB amounts.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS, we:
• Exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the
audit.
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the specified column totals
included in the schedule of OPEB amounts, whether due to fraud or error, and design and
perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures include examining,
on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures of the specified column
totals included in the schedule of OPEB amounts.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the System’s internal control. Accordingly,
no such opinion is expressed.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall
presentation of the specified column totals included in the schedule of OPEB amounts.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other
matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit, significant audit findings, and certain
internal control–related matters that we identified during the audit.
Other Matter
We have audited, in accordance with standards generally accepted in the United States of
America, the financial statements of the fiduciary activities and the proprietary activities of the
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System as of and for the fiscal yea r ended June 30, 2022,
and our report thereon dated December 1, 2022, expressed unmodified opinions on those
financial statements.
Restriction on Use
Our report is intended solely for the information and use of the System’s management, the Audit
Committee, the Public Employees Retirement Board, the State of Oregon and their auditors and
is not intended to be and should not be used by anyone other than these specified parties.
Sacramento, California
February 2, 2023
Employer
Number Employer Name Net OPEB (Asset)
Changes in
Assumptions
Total Deferred
Outflows of
Resources
Differences between
Expected and Actual
Experience
Changes in
Assumptions
Net Difference
between Projected and
Actual Investment
Earnings
Total Deferred Inflows
of Resources Total OPEB (Credit)
1000 State Agencies (34,226,680)$                      879,434$                879,434$                9,030,031$                   13,738,205$       2,225,617$                   24,993,853$                 (5,418,783)$
Total for All Entities (34,226,680)$                      879,434$                879,434$                9,030,031$                   13,738,205$       2,225,617$                   24,993,853$                 (5,418,783)$
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Deferred Inflows of ResourcesDeferred Outflows of Resources
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this schedule.
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Notes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Note 1 - Description of Plan
A. Organization
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System ( PERS or the System ) administers a single-
employer defined benefit Other Postemployment Benefits  (OPEB) plan (Plan) for units of state
government (Employer), with the state as one employer . Plan assets may be used to pay the
benefits of the employees of any state agency  that provides OPEB  through the Plan .
Contributions are mandatory for e ach state agency. As of June 30, 2022, there are  108
participating state agencies.
PERS is administered in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 238, Chapter
238A, and Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a). The Oregon Legislature has delegated authority
to the Public Employees Retirement Board (Board) to administer and manage the System. All
members of the Board are appointed by the G overnor and confirmed by the State Senate. The
Governor designates the chairperson. One member must be a public employer manager or a local
elected official, one member must be a union-represented public employee or retiree, and three
members must have experience in business management, pension management, or investing.
B. Plan Membership
The Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA) was established by ORS 238.4 15 and
requires the Board on or before January 1 of  each year to calculate the average difference
between the health insurance premiums  paid by retired state employees  and health insurance
premiums paid by active state employees. To be eligible to receive this monthly payment toward
the premium cost the member must: (1) have eight years or more of qualifying service with a
state agency in the System at the time of retirement , or (2) is receiving a disability pension
calculated as if they had eight or more years of qualifying service but are not eligible for federal
Medicare coverage. RHIPA was closed to new entrants hired on or after August 29, 2003.
As of June 30, 202 2, retired RHIPA plan participants receiving benefits totaled 607. As of June
30, 2022, there were 10,709 active members who meet the requirements to receive RHIPA
benefits when they retire. Inactive members are not eligible for these benefits.
Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 75
Employers participating in the Plan are required to report OPEB  information in their financial
statements for fiscal periods beginning on or after June 15, 201 7, in accordance with
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 75 , Accounting and Financial
Reporting for Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions (GASB 75).
The requirements of this statement incorporate provisions intended to reflect the effects of
transactions and events re lated to OPEB  in the measurement of employer liabilities for OPEB
and recognition of OPEB  expense and deferred outflows of resources and deferred inflows of
resources related to OPEB.
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Notes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
The Schedule of OPEB Amounts under GASB 75 report prepared by PERS’ third-party actuaries,
along with PERS audited financial statements,  provide the required information for financial
reporting related to PERS OPEB provided through the Plan  as of and for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2022 (the measurement period).
Basis of Accounting
The accompanying Schedule of OPEB Amounts was prepared in accordance with U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles as applicable to governmental organizations. In doing so, PERS
adheres to the reporting requirements established by the GASB.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of the Schedule
The preparation of th e Schedule of OPEB A mounts in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect certain amounts and disclosures. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Note 3 - Net OPEB Liability and Actuarial Assumptions and Methods
The components of the employer’s net OPEB asset, in millions, are as follows:
Net OPEB - RHIPA (Asset) (in Millions)
As of June 30, 2022
Total OPEB - RHIPA Liability $ 49.1
Plan Fiduciary Net Position 83.3
Employer's Net OPEB - RHIPA (Asset) $ (34.2)
Plan net position as a percentage of
Total OPEB - RHIPA Liability 169.7 %
2022
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Notes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
Actuarial valuations of an ongoing plan involve estimates of the value of projected benefits and
assumptions about the probability of events far into the future. Actuarially determined amounts
are subject to continual revision as actual results are compare d to past expectations and new
estimates are made about the future. Experience studies are performed as of December 31 of even
numbered years.  The methods and assumptions shown above are based on the 2020 Experience
Study, which reviewed experience for the four-year period ended on December 31, 2020.
Actuarial Methods and Assumptions
RHIPA
Valuation date December 31, 2020
Measurement date June 30, 2022
Experience Study 2020, published July 20, 2021
Actuarial assumptions:
Actuarial cost method Entry Age Normal
Inflation rate 2.40 percent
Long-term expected rate of return 6.90 percent
Discount rate 6.90 percent
Projected salary increases 3.40 percent
Retiree healthcare participation 8-14 Years of Service: 10.0%
15-19 Years of Service: 11.0%
20-24 Years of Service 14.0%
25-29 Years of Service: 22.0%
30+ Years of Service: 27.0%
Healthcare cost trend rate Applied at beginning of plan year, starting with 5.9%
for 2021, decreasing to 4.7% for 2028, increasing to
4.8% for 2037, and decreasing to an ultimate rate of
3.9% for 2074 and beyond.
Mortality Healthy retirees and beneficiaries:
Pub-2010 Healthy Retiree, sex distinct, generational
with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Active members:
Pub-2010 Employee, sex distinct, generational
with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Disabled retirees:
Pub-2010 Disabled Retiree, sex distinct, generational
with Unisex, Social Security Data Scale, with job category
adjustments and set-backs as described in the valuation.
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Notes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
Discount Rate
The discount rate used to measure the total OPEB  liability of the Plan was 6.90 percent. The
projection of cash flows used to determine the discount rate assumed that contributions are
made at the contractually required rates, as actuarially determined. Based on those assumptions,
the Plan’s fiduciary net position was projected to be available to make all projected future benefit
payments of current Plan members. Therefore, the long -term expected rate of return on P lan
investments was applied to all periods of projected benefit payments to determine the total OPEB
liability.
Long-Term Expected Rate of Return
To develop an analytical basis for the selection of the long -term expected rate of return
assumption, in June 2021 the PERS Board reviewed long -term assumptions developed by both
Milliman’s capital market assumptions team and the Oregon Investment Council’s (OIC)
investment advisors. Each asset class assumption is based on a consistent set of underlying
assumptions, and includes adjustment for the inflation assumption. These assumptions are not
based on historical returns, but instead are based on a forward-looking capital market economic
model. For more information on the Plan’s portfolio, assumed asset allocation, and the long-term
expected rate of return for each major asset class, calculated using both arithmetic and geometric
means, see PERS’ audited financial statements at:
https://www.oregon.gov/pers/Documents/Financials/CAFR/2022-Annual-Comprehensive-
Financial-Report.pdf
Depletion Date Projection
GASB 75 generally requires that a blended discount rate be used to measure the t otal OPEB
liability (the  actuarial accrued liability calculated using the i ndividual entry age normal cost
method). The long-term expected return on plan investments may be used to discount liabilities
to the extent that the plan’s fiduciary net position (fair value of investment assets) is projected to
cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. A 20-year high quality (AA/Aa or higher)
municipal bond rate must be used for periods where the fiduciary net position is not projected to
cover benefit payments and administrative expenses. Determining the discount rate under
GASB 75 will often require that the actuary perform complex projections of future benefit
payments and asset values. GASB 75 (paragraph 39) does allow for alternative evaluations of
projected solvency if such evaluation can reliably be made. GASB does not contemplate a specific
method for making an alternative evaluation of sufficiency; it is left to professional judgment.
The following circumstances justify an alternative evaluation of sufficiency for the OPEB Plan:
• PERS has a formal written policy to calculate an Actuarially Determined Contribution
(ADC), which is articulated in the actuarial valuation report.
• The ADC is based on a closed, layered amortization period, which means that payment of
the full ADC each year will bring the plan to a 100 percent funded position by the end of
the amortization period if future experience follows assumption.
• GASB 75 specifies that the projections regarding future solvency assume that plan assets
earn the assumed rate of return and there are no future changes in the plan provisions
or actuarial methods and assumptions, which means that the projections would not
reflect any adverse future experience which might impact the plan’s funded position.
Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account
Single-Employer Other Postemployment Benefits Plan
Notes to the Schedule of OPEB Amounts
As of and for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
B
ased on these circumstances, it is our third -party actuary’s opinion that the detailed depletion
date projections outlined in GASB 75 would clearly indicate that the f iduciary net position is
always projected to be sufficient to cover benefit payments and administrative expenses.
D
eferred Inflows of Resources and Deferred Outflows of Resources
Differences between expected and actual experience and changes in assumptions are amortized
over the average remaining service lives of all plan participants, including retirees, determined
as of the beginning of the respective measurement period. The Employer is required to recognize
OPEB expense based on the balance of the closed period “layers” attributable to each
measurement period. The average remaining service lives  determined as of the beginning of
each measurement period are described below:
F
iscal Year ended June 30, 2022 – 6.1 years
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2021 – 6.2 years
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2020 – 6.4 years
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2019 – 6.7 years
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2018 – 6.9 years
T
he difference between projected and actual earnings is amortized over a closed five-year period.
D
eferred inflows of resources and deferred outflows of resources are calculated at the Plan level.
For the measurement period ended June 30, 2022, there was:
• A
difference between expected and actual experience.
• A difference due to changes of assumptions.
• A net difference between projected and actual earnings. One- year’s amortization is
recognized in the employer’s total OPEB expense for the measurement period.
E
mployer contributions made after the measurement date are not reflected in the S chedule of
OPEB Amounts. Appropriate treatment of such amounts is the responsibility of the Employer.
I
f you have questions about this report or need additional financial information, please contact
the Financial and Administrative Services Division Administrator at PO Box 23700, Tigard,
Oregon 97281-3700.