Calendar Year 2022
State Government Accountability Hotline
Summary Report
November 2023
Report 2023-34
Since the inception of the Oregon Secretary of State Government Accountability
Hotline, we have identified several million dollars in questioned costs. Those
amounts represent misappropriated public and private funds, questionable
expenditures, monies not spent in accordance with applicable laws, errors in federal
awards, and potential savings that could result from improved efficiencies.
The toll-free hotline was established in 1995 for individuals to report the misuse of
state funds and resources by state agencies, state employees, or persons under
contract with state agencies. Audits Division staff review each hotline report and
determine which reports to investigate further.
This report summarizes activity reported through the Oregon Secretary of State
Government Accountability Hotline in calendar year 2022. As required by Oregon
Revised Statute 177.180, we describe the number, nature, and resolution of hotline
reports received during the year.
By the Numbers
Calendar Year 2022
Total reports to the hotline
in 2022
Of those required further
investigation; one was
substantiated as fraud, and
one was identified as a
violation of federal
compliance requirements
$250,000
The approximate dollar
amount of fraud identified
$390,000
The approximate dollar
amount in questioned costs
identified
Reports remain open and
may result in a management
letter to the involved
agencies
Reports alleged fraud, theft
by misuse of resources,
conflict of interest
violations, or ethics
violations on the part of a
specific state employee
Report Highlights
Calendar Year 2022
State Government Accountability Hotline
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 1
Introduction
As reported in the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ (ACFE) 2022 Global Fraud Study, tips are
consistently the most common fraud detection method.1 The study found 42% of frauds were
uncovered from tips, with employees being the most common source of tips. According to the study,
12.6% of the reported fraud cases reviewed were related to government and public administration,
which was the second leading industry behind banking and financial services. The study also found the
five most common fraud schemes used in government and public administration were: corruption,
billing, expense reimbursements, noncash (e.g., inventory or confidential customer information), and
payroll. The median loss in government due to fraud was $150,000.
The presence of a reporting hotline has a substantial positive impact on how frauds are discovered.
According to the ACFE’s study, organizations with a hotline saw a much higher likelihood that a fraud
would be detected by a tip than organizations without a hotline.
To ensure state employees are aware of the Oregon Secretary of State Government Accountability
Hotline, notices are posted in state offices that explain the purpose of the hotline and display the
hotline telephone number; a hotline page is presented on the Oregon Secretary of State website
2; and
the Secretary sends an annual email to state employees and a press release to citizens about the
hotline. Additionally, Secretary of State Audits Division employees have the hotline’s contact
information in their email signatures and business cards. This active approach to publicizing helps
ensure employees and citizens are aware of the hotline.
The Legislature requires an annual summary report on hotline activity
In 1995, the legislature created the Government Waste Hotline (State Government Accountability
Hotline) for employees and members of the public to report misuse of state funds or resources by
state agencies, state employees, or persons under contract with state agencies. State law provides
confidentiality for the identity of any person making a report through the hotline.3
We are required to notify the Oregon Government Ethics Commission if we find potential violations of
Oregon ethics law (ORS Chapter 244). We are also required to notify the appropriate law enforcement
agency if we find potential criminal activity. For calendar year 2022, we made no direct referrals to the
Oregon Government Ethics Commission; however, we suggested the caller contact them for nine of the
236 reports.
We are also required to prepare and submit an annual report to the Legislature and appropriate interim
committees that describes the number, nature, and resolution of reports made through the hotline. We
are required to include in the report any savings resulting from improved efficiencies or eliminated
waste or misuse that resulted from hotline reports and investigations. To meet the required reporting
requirements, we prepare this annual report of summary-level information.
1 2022 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. Copyright 2022 by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners,
Inc., pages 4, 32, and 33. Available at: 2022 ACFE Report to the Nations
2 https://sos.oregon.gov/audits/Pages/accountability.aspx
3 See ORS 177.180
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 2
How the Hotline Works
To administer the hotline, we contract with a third party that provides 24-hour call center services and
case management software. All hotline reports are logged into a database that selected division staff
access through the case management software. We conduct an initial review of each report of misuse
of state funds and resources and determine which reports to investigate further.
Some reports warrant an audit or investigation. Other reports do not involve claims of misuse of state
funds and resources and are outside our authority to review under the hotline statutes. If we believe a
report would be appropriate for another public body to review, we refer the report information to the
appropriate public entity. For reports that do not fall under the authority of the hotline, if appropriate,
we provide individuals with alternative contacts for reporting their concerns.
If, after completing an investigation, we find that an officer, employee, or contractor of a state agency
or public body was involved in activities constituting misuse of state funds and resources, we may
prepare a written report to the involved state agency or public body. If requested, we also provide a
copy of any report to the person who contacted the hotline.
Currently the hotline is administered by an audit manager, who is a Certified Fraud Examiner, and a
principal auditor who reviews and responds to hotline reports. Most reports are addressed by the lead
and the manager. Occasionally, we assign other staff, including other Certified Fraud Examiners, to help
review those reports.
Hotline reports have declined since 2017
Figure 1 shows the number of hotline reports received since 2013. The volume of reports tends to be
higher during election cycles, after publicized instances of fraud, and after public officials (such as the
Governor or the Secretary of State) send emails promoting the hotline to all state employees. The
increase in the current year brings the number of reports in alignment with the average of the prior 10
years.
Figure 1: Number of reports made to the hotline
329 317
272 273
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 3
Human services are the subject of most reports
Figure 2 lists the agencies that were the most frequent subjects of hotline reports in 2022. Because
reports are rarely substantiated, this chart is not an indicator of which agencies are subjects of true
misuse of state funds or resources. However, it does indicate those agencies that are the subject of the
most concerns. While the Oregon Department of Human Services (ODHS) received the most hotline
calls by a large margin, 42 calls alleged public assistance fraud specific to a recipient. We directed those
callers to ODHS’s fraud hotline.
Figure 2: In 2022 most reports pertained to the Oregon Department of Human
Note: Excludes agencies with 5 or fewer reports
Department of Education
Oregon Health Authority
Public Safety Agencies
Oregon Housing and Community Services
Oregon Department of Human Services
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 4
2022 Hotline Results
Most hotline reports were related to fraud, theft, or ethics
We classify reports received through the hotline as shown in Figure 3. A large portion of reports pertain
to fraud, theft, and ethics. Half of those reports were specific to public assistance fraud for programs
such as supplemental assistance for needy families (a.k.a. food stamps) and emergency rental
assistance.
Figure 3: Over a third of all reports received in 2022 pertained to fraud, theft, or ethics.
Description  Number of 2022
Reports
Percent of 2022
Reports
Fraud, Theft, or Ethics
Reports alleging fraud, falsification or
destruction of information, embezzlement,
theft, corrupt practices, conflict of
interest, or kickbacks
86  36%
Business Practices
Reports concerning state business
practices and public contracting, policies
and procedures, pandemic response, and
cost saving recommendations
58  25%
Unrelated/Insignificant  Reports determined unrelated or
insignificant to state funds or resources  44  18%
Work Environment
Reports alleging improper behavior,
discrimination, wrongful termination, time
theft, or unsafe environments in the
workplace
30  13%
Financial Management  Reports concerning accounting practices,
audits, and tax issues  16  7%
Elections  Reports concerning election systems or
voter fraud  2  1%
Total    236  100%
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 5
Most hotline reports concern state agencies and local governments
Figure 4 details the type of entities that were the subject of hotline reports received in 2022.
Approximately 70% of the reports were related to entities with the potential to receive state funds.
Non-government entities, such as businesses, are less likely to receive state funds.
Figure 4: Most reports pertain to entities with the potential to receive state funds
Report resolution depends on the information provided
Our ability to act on a report depends on the specificity and nature of information provided. If
reporters provide their contact information, we may contact them directly to obtain additional
information. If reporters are anonymous through the online reporting application, we can communicate
through the application to request necessary additional information, but those callers do not always
respond to our requests for more details.
We resolve reports by performing reviews and reporting findings, referring reports to contacts at other
public bodies for their consideration and review, referring reporters to appropriate contacts, and
providing requested information.
We have flexibility in how hotline reports are addressed. Specifically, we can refer reports received
through the hotline to other public bodies (i.e., state government, local governments, and special
purpose governments) more appropriate to address the report. For example, if we receive a report
regarding alleged tax evasion, we can refer that report to the Department of Revenue. When a report is
referred, generally only the content of the report is referred, and the reporter’s identity is withheld
unless the reporter waives confidentiality.
State Agencies
53%
Local Government
17%
Non-Government
30%
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 6
2022 hotline reports
• 185 reports were closed after we provided the reporter with alternative contacts more
appropriate to address their concerns, such as a state agency’s human resources
department or a local government’s board or commission. Several of these cases did
not involve state funds or resources or were personal legal matters outside the purview
of the hotline.
• 19 reports were referred directly to another public body that could more appropriately
investigate the allegation.
• 10 reports alleged fraud or theft by the misuse of resources or conflict of interest ethic
violations on the part of a specific state employee. Four were referred to the
appropriate state agency for investigation. Five were investigated by the hotline, only
one of which was substantiated.
• 11 reports were high-level suggestions for improving efficiencies, not allegations of
wrongdoing. These were added to the division’s internal listing of ideas for future
performance audits.
• 11 reports required further review to determine whether the described concerns
involved misuse of state funds and resources. One violation was substantiated resulting
in a settlement of $250,000. One violation was substantiated resulting in questioned
costs of approximately $400,000.
• Six reports were closed after the reporter did not respond to our requests for
additional information needed to proceed with an investigation.
• Four reports remain open and may result in a management letter to the involved
agency.
2021 hotline reports
One report from 2021 remained open at the release of the prior year report in July 2022. Based on
procedures performed, a violation was substantiated identifying $2,153 in questioned costs.
Oregon Secretary of State | Report 2023-34 | November 2023 | page 7
About the Secretary of State Audits Division
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor
of Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the elected
Secretary of State and is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
branches of Oregon government. The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers,
agencies, boards, and commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Hotline team
Teresa Furnish, CISA, Deputy Director
Ian Green, CGAP, CFE, CISA, CIA, MS Econ, Audit Manager
Kari Mott, CPA, MBA, Principal Auditor
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits