Calendar Year 2023
State Government Accountability Hotline
Summary Report
August 2024
Report 2024-24
Since the inception of the Oregon Secretary of State Government Accountability
Hotline, we have identified several million dollars in questioned costs. Those amounts
represent misappropriated public and private funds, questionable expenditures,
monies not spent in accordance with applicable laws, errors in federal awards, and
potential savings that could result from improved efficiencies or elimination of waste or
misuse.
The toll-free hotline was established in 1995 for individuals to report the misuse of state
funds and resources by state agencies, state employees, or persons under contract
with state agencies. Audits Division staff review each hotline report and determine
which reports to investigate further.
This report summarizes activity reported through the Government Accountability
Hotline in calendar year 2023. As required by Oregon Revised Statute 177.180, we
describe the number, nature, and resolution of hotline reports received during the year.
Secretary of State LaVonne Griffin -Valade
Audits Director Kip R. Memmott
By the Numbers
Calendar Year 2023
Total reports to the hotline in
2023
Of those required further
investigation, none of which
were substantiated as fraud
Reports remain open and
may result in a management
letter to the involved
agencies regarding other
issues, such as identified
control weaknesses
Reports alleged fraud, theft
by misuse of resources, or
conflict of interest violations
on the part of a specific state
employee
Report Highlights
Calendar Year 2023
State Government Accountability Hotline
Introduction
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 1
Tips are critical to the successful detection of fraud. According to the Association of Certified Fraud
Examiners' 2024 Global Fraud Study, tips were the method of identification in 43% of all fraud cases.1
More than half the tips received come from employees of organizations. According to the study, 12.4% of
the reported fraud cases reviewed were related to government and public administration, which was the
third leading industry behind banking and financial services, and manufacturing. The study also found the
six most common fraud schemes used in government and public administration were: corruption, billing,
payroll, cash larceny, expense reimbursement, and noncash (e.g., inventory or confidential customer
information). The median loss in government due to fraud was $150,000.
The presence of a reporting hotline has a substantial positive impact on how frauds are discovered.
According to the association’s study, organizations with a hotline are nearly twice as likely to detect fraud
through tips than organizations without a hotline.
To ensure state employees are aware of the Oregon Secretary of State Government Accountability
Hotline, we distribute a poster for state offices explaining the function of the hotline; the poster displays the
hotline telephone number and web address. Newly redesigned posters were distributed free of charge to
state agencies in 2022 and 2023.
2 Additionally, a hotline page is available on the Oregon Secretary of State
website.3
The Legislature requires an annual summary report on hotline activity
In 1995, the Legislature created the Government Waste Hotline (now called the State Government
Accountability Hotline) for employees and members of the public to report misuse of state funds or
resources by state agencies, state employees, or persons under contract with state agencies. State law
provides confidentiality for the identity of any person making a report through the hotline.
We are required to notify the Oregon Government Ethics Commission if we find potential violations of
Oregon ethics law (ORS Chapter 244). We are also required to notify the appropriate law enforcement
agency if we find potential criminal activity. For calendar year 2023, we made no direct referrals to the
Oregon Government Ethics Commission; however, we suggested the caller contact them for seven of the
268 reports.
We are also required to prepare and submit an annual report to the Legislature and appropriate interim
committees that describes the number, nature, and resolution of reports made through the hotline. We are
required to include in the report any savings resulting from improved efficiencies or eliminated waste or
misuse that resulted from hotline reports and investigations. To meet the required reporting requirements,
we prepare this annual report of summary-level information.
1 2024 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. Copyright 2024 by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners Inc.,
pages 4, 23, 36, and 37. Available at 2024 ACFE Report to the Nations
2 See Appendix A. Any state office can request a poster free of charge by contacting the audits division at audits.sos@oregon.gov.
3 https://sos.oregon.gov/audits/Pages/accountability.aspx
4 See ORS 177.180
How the Hotline Works
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 2
To administer the toll-free hotline, we contract with a third party that provides 24-hour call center services
and case management software.5 All hotline reports are logged into a database that selected division staff
access through the case management software. We conduct an initial review of each report and determine
which reports to investigate further.
Some reports warrant an audit or investigation. Others do not involve claims of misuse of state funds and
resources and are outside our authority to review under the hotline statutes. If we believe a report would be
more appropriate for another public body to review, we refer the information to the appropriate public entity.
For reports that do not fall under the authority of the hotline, if appropriate, we provide individuals with
alternative contacts for reporting their concerns.
If, after completing an investigation, we find that an officer, employee, or contractor of a state agency or
public body was involved in activities constituting misuse of state funds and resources, we must prepare a
written report to the involved state agency or public body. If requested, we also provide a copy of any report
to the person who contacted the hotline.
Currently, the hotline is administered by an audit manager, who is a Certified Fraud Examiner, and a
principal auditor who reviews and responds to hotline reports. Most reports are addressed by the lead and
the manager. Occasionally, we assign other staff, including other Certified Fraud Examiners, to help review
those reports.
Hotline reports have increased in the last couple of years
Figure 1 shows the number of hotline reports received since 2014. The volume of reports tends to be higher
during election cycles, after publicized instances of fraud, and after public officials (such as the Governor or
the Secretary of State) send emails promoting the hotline to all state employees. The increase in the
current year brings the number of reports slightly above the average of the prior 10 years.
Figure 1: Number of reports made to the hotline
5 Navex Global Inc.
329 317
272 273
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 3
Human services allegations are reported most
Figure 2 lists the agencies which were the most frequent subjects of hotline reports in 2023. Since reports
are rarely substantiated, this chart cannot be relied on as an indicator of which agencies are subjects of true
misuse of state funds or resources.
However, the chart does indicate those agencies that are the subject of the most concerns. The Oregon
Department of Human Services (ODHS) received the most hotline calls, with 63 reports alleging fraud
related to public assistance. We directed those callers to ODHS’s fraud hotline.
Figure 2: In 2023, most reports we received pertained to the Oregon Department of Human Services
Note: Excludes agencies with four or fewer reports
Department of Education
Oregon Department of Transportation
Oregon Housing and Community Services
Public Safety Agencies
Oregon Health Authority
Oregon Department of Human Services
2023 Hotline Results
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 4
Most hotline reports were related to fraud, theft, or ethics
We classify reports received through the hotline as shown in Figure 3. A large portion of reports pertain to
fraud, theft, and ethics. 62% of those reports were specific to public assistance fraud for programs such as
supplemental nutrition assistance program (a.k.a. food stamps) and emergency rental assistance.
Figure 3: 39% of all reports received in 2023 pertained to fraud, theft, or ethics
Description  Number of 2023
Reports
Percent of 2023
Reports
Fraud, Theft, or Ethics
Reports alleging fraud, falsification or
destruction of information, embezzlement,
theft, corrupt practices, conflict of interest,
or kickbacks
104 39%
Business Practices
Reports concerning state business
practices and public contracting, policies
and procedures, and cost saving
recommendations
76 28%
Unrelated/Insignificant  Reports determined unrelated or
insignificant to state funds or resources  45 17%
Work Environment
Reports alleging improper behavior,
discrimination, wrongful termination, time
theft, overtime use, or employee
performance
34 13%
Financial Management
Reports concerning accounting and state
spending practices and documentation
concerns
9 3%
Total   268 100%
Most hotline reports concern state agencies and local governments
Figure 4 details the type of entities that were the subject of hotline reports received in 2023. Approximately
77% of the reports were related to entities with the potential to receive state funds. Non-government
entities, such as businesses, are less likely to receive state funds.
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 5
Figure 4: Most reports pertain to entities with the potential to receive state funds
Resolution of hotline reports is dependent on information provided by the reporter
Our ability to act on a report depends on the specificity and nature of the information provided. If a reporter
provides their contact information, we may contact them directly to obtain additional information. If
reporters are anonymous through the online reporting application, we can communicate through the
application to request necessary additional information, but those callers do not always respond to our
requests for more details.
We resolve reports by performing reviews and reporting findings, referring reports to contacts at other
public bodies for their consideration and review, referring reporters to appropriate contacts, and providing
requested information.
We have flexibility in how hotline reports are addressed. Specifically, we can refer reports received through
the hotline to other public bodies (e.g., state government, local governments, and special purpose
governments) more appropriate to address the report. For example, if we receive a report regarding alleged
tax evasion, we can refer that report to the Department of Revenue. When a report is referred, generally
only the content of the report is referred, and the reporter’s identity is withheld unless the reporter waives
confidentiality.
2023 hotline reports
• 210 reports  were closed after we provided the reporter with alternative contacts more appropriate
to address their concerns, such as a state agency’s human resources department or a local
government’s board or commission. Several of these cases did not involve state funds or
resources or were personal legal matters outside the purview of the hotline.
• 14 reports  were referred directly to another public body that could more appropriately investigate
the allegation.
State Agencies
64%
Local Government
13%
Non-Government
23%
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 6
• 11 reports  alleged fraud or theft by the misuse of resources or conflict of interest ethic violations
on the part of a specific state employee.
o Four were reported to the appropriate state agency for investigation.
o Four resulted in our referring a caller to the appropriate state agency for investigation.
o Three related to former Secretary of State Shemia Fagan, which were closed in response
to the corresponding investigation by the Oregon Ethics Commission.
• Six reports  were high-level suggestions for improving efficiencies, not allegations of wrongdoing.
These were added to the division’s internal listing of ideas for future performance audits.
• 16 reports  required further review to determine whether the described concerns involved misuse
of state funds and resources.
o Eight were unsubstantiated.
o Five were referred to an audit team, and
o Three related to former Secretary of State Shemia Fagan, which were closed in response
to the corresponding investigation by the Oregon Ethics Commission.
• 17 reports  were closed after the reporter did not respond to our requests for additional information
needed to proceed with an investigation.
• Four reports  remain open and may result in a management letter to the involved agency.
2022 hotline reports
At the time of last year’s hotline summary report in November 2023, four reports from 2022 remained open.
As of this report, based on procedures performed, we found the violations were not substantiated.
ABOUT THE SECRETARY OF STATE AUDITS DIVISION
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of
Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the Secretary of State and
is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon
government. The division has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards and
commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Audit team
Teresa Furnish, CISA, Deputy Director
Ian Green, CGAP, CFE, CISA, CIA, MS Econ, Audit Manager
Kari Mott, CPA, MBA, Principal Auditor
Kyle Rossi, Principal Auditor
Appendix A: State Government Accountability Hotline
Poster
Oregon Secretary of State August 2024
Report 2024-24 page 7
Secretary of State LaVonne Griffin -Valade
Audits Director Kip R. Memmott
This report is intended to promote the best possible management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits