High School Graduation
and College and Career
Readiness Fund
Biennial Financial Report
For Biennium Ended June 30, 2023
Table of Contents
Financial Section ............................................................................................................................. 2
Independent Auditors’ Report ..................................................................................................... 2
Basic Financial Statements .......................................................................................................... 4
Balance Sheet – June 30, 2023 ................................................................................................. 4
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances
For the Biennium Ended June 30, 2023 .................................................................................... 5
Notes to the Financial Statements ........................................................................................... 6
Other Report ................................................................................................................................... 9
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and on Compliance on Other Matters ..... 9
Kip Memmott
Division Director
255 Capitol St NE, Ste 180
Salem, Oregon 97310
LaVonne Griffin -Valade Cheryl Myers       Information (503) 986-2255
Oregon Secretary of State  Deputy Secretary & Tribal Liaison sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
Oregon State Board of Education
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements
Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of the High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness
Fund, a special revenue fund of the State of Oregon, Department of Education, as of and for the biennium year
ended June 30, 2023, and the related notes to the financial statements, as listed in the table of contents.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of the High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund, a special
revenue fund of the State of Oregon, Department of Education, as of June 30, 2023, and the changes in its
financial position for the biennium then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Our responsibilities under those standards
are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our
report. We are required to be independent of the State of Oregon, Department of Education, and to meet our
other ethical responsibilities, in accordance with the relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit. We
believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our
opinion.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the High School Graduation and College and Career
Readiness Fund and do not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the State of Oregon or the
Department of Education, as of June 30, 2023, or the changes in its financial position for the biennium then ended in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our opinion is not
modified with respect to this matter.
Responsibilities of Management for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and for the design,
Audits Division
implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance and therefore is not
a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards will
always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement
resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery,
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Misstatements are considered
material if there is a substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would influence the
judgment made by a reasonable user based on the financial statements.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards, we
• exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, and design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures
include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and the disclosures in the
financial statements.
• obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Oregon Department of Education’s internal control. Accordingly, no such opinion
is expressed.
• evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall presentation of the
financial statements.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit, significant audit findings, and certain internal control-related matters
that we identified during the audit.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated June 5, 2024, on
our consideration of the Oregon Department of Education‘s internal control over financial reporting and on our
tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements and other
matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control over
financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Oregon Department of Education’s internal control over financial reporting or on
compliance. That report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government Auditing
Standards in considering the Oregon Department of Education’s internal control over financial reporting and
compliance.
State of Oregon
June 5, 2024
Oregon Department of Education
High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund
Balance Sheet
June 30, 2023
ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents            56,917,095
Due from Other Funds  16,180,685
TOTAL ASSETS
$73,097,780
LIABILITIES AND FUND BALANCE
Liabilities:
Accounts and Interest Payable               40,919,403
Total Liabilities               40,919,403
Fund Balance:
Restricted by:
Enabling Legislation               32,178,377
Total Fund Balances               32,178,377
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND FUND BALANCE
$73,097,780
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
Oregon Department of Education
High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund
Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances
For the Biennium Ended June 30, 2023
REVENUES
Other                  95,111
Total Revenues  $                   95,111
EXPENDITURES  Current:
Salaries and Wages 2,784,218
Services and Supplies 228,206
Distribution to Local School Districts             309,705,817
Distribution to Non-Governments               13,224,502
Total Expenditures  $         325,942,744
Excess (Deficiency) of Revenues Over (Under)
Expenditures           (325,847,632)
OTHER FINANCING SOURCES (USES)
Transfers from General Fund 174,618,343
Transfers from Other Funds             136,682,685
Total Other Financing Sources (Uses)           311,301,028
Net Change in Fund Balances          (14,546,604)
Fund Balances - Beginning           46,724,981
Fund Balances - Ending  $           32,178,377
The notes to the financial statements are an integral part of this statement.
Notes to the Basic Financial Statements – Governmental Funds
June 30, 2023
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accompanying financial statements of the Oregon Department of Education’s High School
Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund (Fund) have been prepared in conformity
with generally accepted accounting principles for governments as prescribed by Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB).
A. Reporting Entity
The High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund was initiated by ballot
Measure 98 entitled High School Success in November 2016 with the measure passing with
65% voter support. The Fund was established pursuant to House Bill 2246 (2017). The
purpose of the Fund is to improve the graduation rates and college and career readiness of
all high school students in Oregon.
The High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund program is
administered by the Oregon Department of Education (ODE). The Fund consists of several
activities to establish or expand programs in three specific areas: Dropout Prevention,
Career and Technical Education and College Level Education Opportunities. The intent is to
improve student progress toward graduation beginning with grade 9, increase the
graduation rates of high schools and improve high school graduates’ readiness for college
and career.
B. Basis of Presentation
ODE programs and accounts are organized by funds, each of which is a separate accounting
entity. The funds utilize a separate set of self-balancing accounts to record the assets,
liabilities, fund balance, revenues and expenses of their program activities. ODE’s High
School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund program is classified as a
governmental fund.
Governmental funds focus on how cash and other financial resources that can be readily
converted to cash flow in and out and the balances remaining at year-end that are available
to spend. Thus, the governmental fund statements provide a detailed short-term view that
helps to determine whether there are more or less financial resources that can be spent in
the near future to finance ODE’s programs.
C. Measurement Focus and Basis of Accounting
The basic financial statements for the Fund are presented as a governmental fund. As such,
the Fund is accounted for using the current financial resources measurement focus and the
modified accrual basis of accounting. Revenues are recognized when they are both
measurable and available. Revenues are considered available when they are collectible
within the current year or soon enough thereafter to pay liabilities existing at the end of the
year. For this purpose, ODE considers revenues as available, if they are collected within 90
days of the end of the current fiscal year. Expenditures generally are recognized when a
liability is incurred, as under accrual accounting.
D. Budgetary Process
The Oregon Legislature approves ODE’s budget on a biennial basis. The High School
Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund program expenditures are monitored
against approved budgets, quarterly allotments and cash balances. Limitations lapse at the
end of the biennium. The Emergency Board of the Legislature approves any necessary
increases in budgets when the Legislature is not in session. The Fund has continuous
spending authority under ORS 327.856.
E. Cash and Cash Equivalents
All monies of the Fund are deposited with the State Treasury, which is responsible for
maintaining these deposits in accordance with Oregon law. The Fund considers all such
deposits to be cash and cash equivalents. The Fund has no other cash deposits or
investments.
F. Fund Equity
The difference between assets and liabilities is labeled “Fund Balance” on the governmental
fund financial statements. Fund balance is reported as Restricted which are the result of
constraints imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling legislation or by
parties outside the State, such as creditors, grantors, contributors or laws or regulations of
other governments. Enabling legislation authorizes the State to levy, assess, charge, or
otherwise mandate payment from external resource providers and includes a legally
enforceable requirement that those resources be used only for specific purposes stipulated
by the legislation.
Note 2 – Cash and Cash Equivalents
On June 30, 2023, the book balance of cash and cash equivalents was $56,917,095 and the bank
balance was $61,454,655. All cash in the Fund is deposited in demand accounts with the State
Treasurer in the Oregon Short-Term Fund (OSTF), a cash and investment pool for use by all
state agencies.
The custodial credit risk for deposits is the risk that, in the event of a bank failure, the State
Treasurer will not be able to recover deposits or will not be able to recover collateral securities
that are in the possession of an outside party. ODE does not have a policy regarding custodial
credit risk for deposits; however, the insurance and collateral requirements for deposits in the
OSTF are established by banking regulations and Oregon law.
A separate financial report for the OSTF is prepared by the Treasurer. Copies of the report may
be obtained by writing to the Oregon State Treasury, 867 Hawthorne Avenue SE, Salem, Oregon
97301, or from the Treasury’s website.
Note 3 – Commitments
As of June 30, 2023, the Fund has active grant agreements in the amount of $369,609,484
obligated during the 2021-23 biennium and has disbursed a total of $326,375,055 to districts
and charter schools that serve students in grade 9 through grade 12. The amount of
undisbursed grant commitments is $43,234,428.
Note 4 – Interfund Transactions
Transfers are used to move (1) revenues collected by one fund to the fund authorized by
statute or the State’s budget to expend them, and (2) unrestricted revenues collected by the
General Fund for various programs accounted for in other funds according to State budget
requirements.
In the 2021 legislative sessions, Senate Bill 5513 was passed, appropriating $174,618,343 from
the General Fund to the Fund during the 2021-23 biennium.
In the 2021 legislative session, Senate Bill 5513 was passed requiring $136,682,685 to be
transferred from the Fund for Student Success to the Fund during the 2021-23 biennium.
Kip Memmott
Division Director
255 Capitol St NE, Ste 180
Salem, Oregon 97310
LaVonne Griffin -Valade Cheryl Myers  Information (503) 986-2255
Oregon Secretary of State  Deputy Secretary & Tribal Liaison sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an
Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With
Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
Oregon State Board of Education
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the financial statements of the High School
Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund, a special revenue fund of the State of Oregon,
Department of Education, as of and for the biennium ended June 30, 2023, and the related notes to the
financial statements, which collectively comprise the High School Graduation and College and Career
Readiness Fund’s basic financial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated June 5, 2024.
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Oregon Department of
Education’s (department) internal control over financial reporting (internal control) related to the High
School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund as a basis for designing audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial statements,
but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s internal control.
Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s internal control.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management
or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and
correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of
the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A
significant deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe
than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this
section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses
or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified.
Audits Division
Report on Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the department’s financial statements of the
High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Fund are free from material misstatement, we
performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant
agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material effect on the financial statements.
However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was not an objective of our audit, and
accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The results of our tests disclosed no instances of
noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance
and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s
internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards in considering the department’s internal control and compliance.
Accordingly, this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
June 5, 2024