2024-25
Audit Plan
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 1
Letter from the Secretary of State
When I was sworn in as Oregon’s 29th Secretary of State, I knew my top priority had
to be rebuilding public trust in our agency. My 16 years as a government auditor,
including serving on the Association of Local Government Auditors’ peer review
committee, gave me the tools and experience to make this happen.
2023 was an exceptionally difficult year for the Secretary of State’s Office, and
nowhere was that more apparent than in our Audits Division. The division has long
enjoyed a well-deserved reputation for objectivity and integrity, so it was
disappointing to see how the actions of one individual stirred public doubt about the
credibility of their work.
But the Secretary of State’s Office is no stranger to change, and agency staff are
resilient, dedicated professionals. Indeed, I am pleased to report the Audits Division
has taken advantage of the opportunity to improve and refine several of its
processes and procedures. Two of these improvements are reflected in the 2024-25
Audit Plan.
First, you’ll notice each proposed audit clearly states the origin of each planned audit, many of which came from the
experience and knowledge of auditors on staff. Other suggestions were generated by the Governor, legislators, and
agency directors. However, it is the Secretary of State and division management who ultimately vet audit topics for
inclusion in the plan.
Second, the Audits Division has launched an ongoing initiative to carefully document the risk assessment process by
which audit projects are selected. Future audits will benefit from some of our longer-term planned efforts, which
includes contracting with an independent, third-party consultant to further improve the risk assessment process.
The division has had a highly productive year. The list of audits released thus far include Measure 110’s distribution of
grants to address substance abuse disorders; how Oregon can better address domestic violence; drawing attention to
Extreme Risk Protection Orders; and the massive undertaking that is the Statewide Single Audit of the state
government’s financial health.
I want to thank Audits Director Kip Memmott for his leadership throughout the year, as well as the Audits Division’s
dedicated staff. They’ve endured intense scrutiny — including my own — with grace and dignity. They are the reason I
can stand behind the division’s good work.
— LaVonne Griffin-Valade, Secretary of State
New Performance and IT Audits  pg. 3
Bureau of Labor and Industries Governance | Bureau of Labor and Industries
Behavioral Health Crisis Services and Crisis Response | Oregon Health Authority
Department of Corrections Operations | Department of Corrections
Emergency Management Time Accounting Practices | Oregon Department of Emergency Management
High School Graduation and College and Career Readiness Act (Measure 98) | Department of Education
Measure 110 Program Effectiveness | Oregon Health Authority
Statewide Contracting Practices | Multiple agencies
State Data Center Operations and Controls | Department of Administrative Services, Enterprise Information Services
Cybersecurity Controls | Oregon Judicial Department
Financial Audits  pg. 7
Statewide Single Audit, financial and federal
Financial statement audits
Updates on Audits From the 2023-24 Plan pg. 8
About the Plan and Our Risk Assessment pg. 10
Audit Plan at a Glance
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 3
New Performance and IT Audits
The Audits Division selects new performance audits through a team-centric, independent risk
assessment process (see pg. 15). Part of this process involves considering feedback from a wide range
of stakeholders, including the Governor’s Office, agency directors, and members of the Legislature. It is
ultimately the decision of division management which audits are selected for inclusion in the annual
audit plan.
Bureau of Labor and Industries Governance
Bureau of Labor and Industries
The mission of the Bureau of Labor and Industries (BOLI) is to protect employment rights, advance employment
opportunities, and protect access to housing and public accommodations free from discrimination. To evaluate whether
the agency is meeting its mission, the audit could review the agency's current governance model and statutory
responsibilities. The audit could also examine the bureau's labor and civil rights or wage and hour investigation
processes as well as its oversight over Oregon's apprenticeship programs.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff, request from agency leadership
Behavioral Health Crisis Services and Crisis
Response
Oregon Health Authority
Several Secretary of State audits have noted serious and complex risks and challenges within Oregon’s behavioral
health care system. A 2020 performance audit presented a high-level review of system shortfalls. This audit's
objectives will focus on the Oregon Health Authority’s (OHA) implementation and oversight of the state's recently
enhanced Behavioral Health Crisis Response System and the associated 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. Additionally, it
will examine the state's oversight of hospital and emergency department discharge requirements for individuals who
are treated for a behavioral health crisis or suicide attempt as required by House Bill 2023 (2015) and House Bill 3090
(2018). This project is a rollover from the 2023-24 Audit Plan and was originally intended to focus on youth suicide
prevention efforts.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 4
Department of Corrections Operations
Department of Corrections
Since the last performance audit conducted by the Secretary of State in 2013, numerous health and safety issues have
been reported regarding adults in custody and corrections staff across the state, in addition to lawsuits against agency
staff. There have been reports on risks regarding staffing, particularly around coverage, overtime, training, and
oversight. These risks can affect the agency's ability to meet its mission. This audit will examine the root causes of
these risks and the department’s efficacy in addressing them. The audit may include an objective examining the roles of
the Corrections Ombudsman in the Governor's Office and the department's Inspector General functions.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff
Emergency Management Time Accounting
Practices
Oregon Department of Emergency Management
The Legislature created an independent Department of Emergency Management (ODEM), whereas it had previously
been housed under the Oregon Military Department. New agency leadership reached out to the division to request
assistance with a risk assessment. This audit will examine agency time accounting practices to determine compliance
with funding source requirements and to assess personnel utilization trends. The new director has performed a 90-day
assessment, identified several significant challenges and risks to operations, and has requested the division provide an
independent evaluation of the agency’s fiscal practices to inform strategic planning. This audit will be designed to assist
ODEM successfully establish practices that will ensure effective coordination of private sector and government efforts
to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies to the benefit of all Oregonians.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff, request from agency leadership
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 5
High School Graduation and College and
Career Readiness Act (Measure 98)
Department of Education
ORS 327.895 requires a program audit of the uses and effectiveness of the fund established by the High School
Graduation and College and Career Readiness Act. The Act allocates funds to several programs including: career and
technical education, college-level educational opportunities, and drop-out prevention strategies. The initial audit,
issued in 2020, focused on governance and controls and was a "real-time" audit owing to the early status of the
program's implementation. Subsequent audits will examine the Act's program areas. Per statute, the next audit must be
issued by December 2024. This will be the third audit of the measure since it passed.
This is a statutorily mandated audit
Measure 110 Program Effectiveness
Oregon Health Authority
The last of three mandated audits of Measure 110, the state's pioneering effort around drug decriminalization and
funding expanded substance use disorder treatment. This audit will assess the program effectiveness and outcomes of
the new treatment system funded by grants from the Oversight and Accountability Council and administered by the
Oregon Health Authority. Legislative requirements include an assessment of the functioning of law enforcement and
the courts, the telephone hotline, and outcomes such as whether access to care has increased, treatment service
providers have increased, and overdoses decreased. It will also assess data on Behavioral Health Resource Networks
and grant recipients, including outcomes of each network or recipient, the numbers of individuals seeking treatment
who are denied access and the reasons for any delays, the average wait time to access services, and demographic data
on clients served.
This is a statutorily mandated audit
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 6
Statewide Contracting Practices
Multiple agencies
Poorly structured, managed, or executed contracts can severely impact the availability, quality, or value of services
provided to Oregonians and can result in mismanagement of state resources. Agencies may not be following leading
practices, leveraging available resources and tools, or ensuring personnel involved in the contracting process have
adequate and appropriate training. The Department of Administrative Services is required to create and provide
procurement training offerings, resources, and tools; however, agencies and those involved in the contracting process
may not be using them. This audit will assess whether state contracts are following leading practices, and if personnel
involved with structuring, managing, and executing contracts have the required, adequate, and appropriate training and
experience for their roles.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff
State Data Center Operations and Controls
Department of Administrative Services, Enterprise Information Services
Data Center Services (DCS) provides centralized computer services such as networking, email, backup, and server
services for more than 100 state agencies, boards, and commissions. In addition, Cyber Security Services (CSS)
provides centralized security services to state agencies, including state-level security incident response, security
information and event management from the perimeter firewalls and other data feeds, and network security
monitoring and analysis. The Audits Division regularly conducts audits of these entities, approximately every three
years. This audit will provide an objective external look at the operating and security controls to ensure those controls
are appropriately designed, implemented, and effective in minimizing the risk to the availability and security of the
state’s data assets.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff
Cybersecurity Controls
Oregon Judicial Department
The division has issued a number of cybersecurity audits at several state agencies. The purpose of these audits is to
determine whether state agencies have effective and efficient IT security frameworks and control structures.
The Oregon Judicial Department is the next agency to be reviewed.
Suggested by: Oregon Audits Division staff
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 7
Financial Audits
Statewide Single Audit
In two parts: Financial and federal
A single audit is required by the federal government for the federal financial assistance Oregon receives each year.
These audits determine whether amounts reported in Oregon’s financial statements are materially correct and
adequately supported; evaluate the state’s administration of major federal programs for compliance with applicable
laws, rules, and regulations; conclude on whether the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards is fairly presented in
relation to the state’s financial statements; and review accounting and compliance control procedures.
The Single Audit, which accounts for a significant portion of the division’s financial work, has two main components.
The first is a financial audit of the State’s financial statements and reporting on the schedule of expenditures of federal
awards (SEFA) in relation to those financial statements. The second is a compliance audit of major federal awards
expended during the fiscal year. Most of Oregon’s biggest agencies are included in this audit.
Financial statement audits
The objective of these audits is to review internal accounting and
compliance control procedures and to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the amounts reported in the financial statements are
materially correct and adequately supported.
We annually audit the following programs and agencies:
Oregon State Treasury: Short-Term, Local Government Investment
Fund, Intermediate Term Pool
Oregon Business Development Department: Special Public Works
Fund and Water Fund
Oregon Department of Energy: Small Scale Energy Loan Program
Department of Environmental Quality: Clean Water Revolving Fund
Oregon Department of Higher Education: High School Graduation and
College and Career Readiness Fund (biennial audit)
Oregon Health Authority: Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace
This audit also seeks to verify compliance with programmatic
requirements set forth by federal regulations, state statute, and the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Oregon Housing and Community Services
Oregon State Lottery
Oregon Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 8
Updates on Audits From the 2023-24 Plan
Boards and Commissions Governance High Risk
Report
Multiple agencies
Kicked off in September 2023.
This advisory risk report will include a systemic root cause assessment of boards and commissions with
the goal of generating enterprise-wide recommendations based on leading practices to ensure state
boards and commissions are fulfilling their statutory responsibilities in a transparent and effective
manner.
Children's Mental Health Services
Oregon Health Authority
Kicked off in April 2023, but the scope has changed.
The 2023-24 Plan indicated this audit would assess state services and programs designed to prevent
suicide and identifying leading practices based on emerging studies of youth suicide risks. The scope
has been updated as reflected in the new listing of audits
.
Cybersecurity Controls
Oregon Department of Justice
Will kick off in July 2024.
The division has executed nine cybersecurity audits of large state agencies. The Oregon of Justice will
be the next agency to undergo a cybersecurity audit, in addition to the audit of the Oregon Judicial
Department announced in this year’s plan.
New Agency Governance and Controls
Department of Early Learning and Care (DELC)
Kicked off in May 2023.
This real-time audit will examine risks and challenges that may hinder DELC from getting off to a strong
and lasting start as a new state agency. The audit will also provide assurance and will be based on a
collaborative approach with key stakeholders including agency management. The audit will include an
objective assessing time tax risks with DELC programs and services.
Universal Health Care Administrative Costs and Time
Tax Risks
Oregon Health Authority, Oregon Department of Human Services
Kicked off in October 2023.
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 9
In September 2022, the Joint Task Force on Universal Health Care issued its final report and
recommendations. This audit will examine the administrative savings potentials outlined in the report.
The team will also examine the impacts of the “time tax” imposed by the existing bureaucratic health
care system.
Oregon License Issuance and Vehicle Registration
System (OLIVR) Controls
Oregon Department of Transportation
Kicked off in November 2022.
The Oregon License Issuance and Vehicle Registration System (OLIVR) is ODOT's new IT system for the
Department of Motor Vehicles. This audit will examine and test system controls to support work being
performed by the financial audit team and may also include an accessibility and usability objective.
Integrated Eligibility (ONE) System Controls
Oregon Department of Human Services, Oregon Health Authority
Kicked off in March 2022.
The ONE system determines eligibility for multiple benefit programs at ODHS and OHA. This audit will
examine whether the ONE system is appropriately determining eligibility for Medicaid, CHIP, and SNAP
programs, whether eligibility overrides are appropriately performed, and whether changes to the ONE
system are appropriately controlled.
Audits no longer under consideration: Adult protective services; Student Success Act district
performance monitoring; and sexual health care and reproductive access.
Oregon Secretary of State | 2024-25 Annual Audit Plan | February 2024 | page 10
About the Plan and Our Risk Assessment
The mission of the Oregon Audits Division is to protect the public interest and improve Oregon
government. A key component of this mission is the division’s annual audit plan, which lists the
agencies, programs, and topics prioritized for audits in the coming year.
The annual audit plan demonstrates two key philosophies of the Audits Division: our commitment to
building public trust and transparency, and our emphasis on being agile and responsive to critical
issues facing the state. While we are committed to completing the audits listed in the plan, our risk
assessment process is continuous. The plan is a flexible document, and we will redirect audit resources
as necessary to address issues as they arise.
Government audit standards require any audit initiated be completed unless circumstances arise that
justify its termination. Any decision to terminate an audit must be documented and publicly reported.
We follow professional standards and guidelines in both developing and executing this audit plan.
We select and prioritize audits using a risk-assessment approach
Audits are all about risk. There will always be inherent risks in state government owing to the size of
budgets, the vulnerable populations served, and the important work state agencies do in service of
Oregonians.
There are no government audit standards or best practices that dictate how a risk assessment should
be conducted. Beginning with the 2024-25 risk assessment, the division implemented an audit team-
centric risk assessment process. Audit teams will be responsible for identifying, ranking, and proposing
audits for inclusion in the annual audit plan.
Along with the audit team, the Audits Director, Deputy Director, and the division’s Communications
Specialist play a key role in developing and editing the audit plan. In conjunction with our professional
judgement, we consider some of the following factors when choosing audits:
• Emerging public policy, especially with regard to aspects of human health or safety;
• Opportunities to assess equity within state government, including agency efforts that
specifically call out diversity, inclusion, and equity;
• Established priorities of state leadership, including the Governor, Legislature, and the Secretary
of State;
• Known problem areas, often identified through other audit shops, agency leadership, or media
coverage;
• And others.
In addition to risk assessment used to identify the limited number of discretionary audits included in
the plan, several of the audits included in the plan are mandated by federal or state statute.
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits