State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
An Investment Pool of the State of Oregon
Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2024
This page intentionally left blank
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................... 1-3
Financial Statements:
Statement of Net Position ................................................................................................................ 4
Statement of Changes in Net Position ............................................................................................. 5
Notes to Financial Statements  .................................................................................................... 7-11
Other Reports
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
and on Compliance and Other Matters ..................................................................................... 13-14
This page intentionally left blank.
Kip Memmott
Division Director
2 55 Capitol St NE, Ste 180
Salem, Oregon 97310
LaVonne Griffin -Valade Cheryl Myers  Information (503) 986-2255
Oregon Secretary of State  Deputy Secretary & Tribal Liaison sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements
Opinion
We have audited the ﬁnancial statements of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, an internal investment
pool of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2024, and the related notes to the
ﬁnancial statements, as listed in the table of contents.
In our opinion, the accompanying ﬁnancial statements referred to above present fairly , in all material
respects, the ﬁnancial position of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, as of June 30, 2024, and the
changes in its ﬁnancial position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to ﬁnancial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Our responsibilities under those
standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
section of our report. We are required to be independent of the Oregon State Treasury and the Oregon
Intermediate Term Pool, and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in accordance with the relevant
ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient
and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the ﬁnancial statements present only the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool and do
not purport to, and do not, present fairly the ﬁnancial position of the State of Oregon or the Oregon State
Treasury, as of June 30, 2024, or the changes in its ﬁnancial position for the year then ended in accordance
Audits Division
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our opinion is not modiﬁed
with respect to this matter .
Responsibilities of Management for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these ﬁnancial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and for the
design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair
presentation of ﬁnancial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error .
Auditor’s Responsibility for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the ﬁnancial statements as a whole are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error , and to issue an auditor’ s report that includes
our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance and therefore
is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards
will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement
resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error , as fraud may involve collusion, forgery ,
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Misstatements are
considered material if there is a substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would
inﬂuence the judgment made by a reasonable user based on the ﬁnancial statements.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards, we
• exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the ﬁnancial statements, whether due to
fraud or error , and design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such
procedures include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and the
disclosures in the ﬁnancial statements.
• obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control. Accordingly , no such opinion is
expressed.
• evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of signiﬁcant
accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall presentation of the
ﬁnancial statements.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit, signiﬁcant audit ﬁndings, and certain internal control-related matters
that we identiﬁed during the audit.
Audits Division
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our report dated
September 17, 2024, on our consideration of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over ﬁnancial
reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and
grant agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our
testing of internal control over ﬁnancial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to
provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over ﬁnancial
reporting or on compliance. That report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards in considering the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over ﬁnancial
reporting and compliance.
State of Oregon
September 17, 2024
State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2024
(Dollars in Thousands)
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents 37,548$
Investments 308,768
Receivable for Investments Sold 349
Accrued Interest Receivable 1,403
Total Assets 348,068
Liabilities:
Payable for Investments Purchased 37,686
Total Liabilities 37,686
Net Position:
Held for Pool Participants 310,382
Total Net Position 310,382$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
State of Oregon
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Statement of Changes in Net Position
For the Year Ended June 30, 2024
(Dollars in Thousands)
Additions
Investment Earnings:
Interest, Dividends and Other 14,381$
Net Increase in Fair Value of Investments 1,194
Securities Lending Income 73
Total Investment Earnings 15,648
Less Investment Costs:
Investment Activity Costs (Note 4) 213
Securities Lending Costs 33
Net Investment Earnings 15,402
Participant Account Transactions:
Participants' Contributions 27,735
Participants' Withdrawals (45,180)
Net Decrease as a Result of Participant Transactions (17,445)
Change in Net Position Held for Pool Participants (2,043)
Net Position - Beginning 312,425
Net Position - Ending 310,382$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements
This page intentionally left blank
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2024
(1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Reporting Entity   The Oregon Intermediate Term Pool (“Pool”) is a n intermediate term fixed income
investment vehicle.  Several state agencies participate in the Pool. During the year ended June 30, 2024 the
Pool did not have any non-agency entity participants, thus it is an internal investment pool.
The Pool is not registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment company.
The State’s investment policies are governed by Oregon Revised Statutes and the Oregon Investment Council
(Council).  The State Treasurer is the investment offic er for the Council and is responsible for all funds
entrusted to the Oregon State Treasury (OST).  These funds must be invested, and the investments managed,
as a prudent investor would, exercising reasonable care, skill and caution.  Investments in the Pool are further
governed by guidelines approved by the Council, establishing diversification percentages and specifying the
types and maturities of investments.  The Pool  guidelines permit securities lending transactions as well as
investments in repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.  Pool guidelines are discussed in greater detail
in the Investments section of Note 2.
The Pool is authorized under ORS 293.861 and ORS 293.863.  Standards for investment of the pool may be
found in ORS 293.701  to 293.857.  Pursuant to ORS 293.863 (5), state agencies have the opportunity to
participate in this investment pool subject to application requiring evidence of statutory authority to invest in
the Pool and subsequent approval by the OST.
Basis of Accounting   These statements are prepared using the economic resources measurement focus and
the accrual basis of accounting.  Trade date accounting is observed, which means that purchases and sales of
securities are recorded on the day the trade takes place with a corresp onding payable to or receivable from
the broker.  Changes in the fair value of investments are recognized daily .  The fair value of investments is
determined daily and is equal to market price.
Cash and Cash Equivalents   Investments with original maturities of three months or less are considered
cash equivalents and are reported at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.  Cash Equivalents also
include any cash held with the custodian, and amounts invested in the Oregon Short  Term Fund (OSTF),
which is an external investment pool open to state agencies and local governments that acts as a demand
deposit account.
Investments   Investments with remaining maturities of  less than ninety days are carried at amortized cost,
provided that the fair value of these instruments is not significantly affected by the impairment of the credit
standing of the issuer or by other factors.  Amortized cost approximates fair value.  Investments with longer
maturities are carried at fair value.
Participants’ equity; distributions of interest    The value of each participant’s investment is determined on
a proportional basis to the net market value of the entire portfolio.   Shares of the Pool  represent a divisible
interest in the net value of underlying investments, accrued income and expenses. Interest income and capital
gains are not distributed to participants but are reflected in the underlying net position.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2024
(2) Investments
Investments   On June 30, 2024, the Pool reported investments of $346.3 million of which $37.5 million is
classified as Cash and Cash Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position.  The Pool’s guidelines establish
the Pool’s permitted investments and parameters for managing the various types of risk associated with these
investments (see the current portfolio guidelines a t (https://www.oregon.gov/treasury/invested-for-
oregon/pages/oregon-intermediate-term-investments.aspx#OITP.) T h e different risks will be discussed
below.
Schedule of Investment Characteristics
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type Par Value
Reported
Amount
Weighted Average
Coupon
Weighted Average
Modified Duration
Cash and Cash Equivalents (1)  $              37,548  $             37,548 5.20 0.25
Asset-Backed Securities                  34,342                 33,975 4.40 1.10
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities                       472                      451 3.62 1.94
U.S Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities                  21,004                 19,015 4.88 5.29
Municipal Debt                       323                      316 3.62 1.26
Corporate Debt                  69,307                 65,283 4.53 4.30
U.S. Treasury Debt                188,821               189,728 4.57 4.00
Total 351,817$            346,316$           4 .63 3.43
(1) Cash and Cash Equivalents include $37,548 invested in the OSTF.
A. Interest rate and Credit risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an investment.
OST Investment staff manages this risk by limiting the duration of investments held by the Pool.  The portfolio
guidelines require that the portfolio’s modified duration, a measure of interest rate risk, shall not exceed three
years. The weighted average duration for the Pool at June 30, 2024 was 3.43 years.  The maximum maturity
for any single investment should not be greater th an 10.25 years from settlement date, with exceptions for
asset-backed securities,  mortgage- backed securities,  and commercial mortgage -backed securities. These
securities use weighted average life (WAL) as a proxy for maturity and are limited to a WAL of five years,
or less, at the time of purchase.
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligation.  The
Pool’s guidelines require that all investments meet minimum ratings requirements at the time of purchase.
Minimum required ratings are subject to investment type as dictated by the Pool’s guidelines.
Corporate notes and municipal debt must be rated investment grade or higher at time of purchase.  Foreign
government securities are required to have a minimum credit rating of AA- or Aa3 by at least two Nationally
Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSROs) .  Structured securities such as asset -backed and
mortgage-backed securities must be rated AAA at the time of purchase.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2024
Securities downgraded below investment grade can be retained at the Senior Investment Officer’s discretion.
Rating groups are determined using the lowest actual rating from an NRSRO and are shown below:
B. Custodial credit risk
Custodial credit risk for investments is the risk that, in the event of the failure of the counterparty to a
transaction, the pool will not be able to recover the value of an investment or collateral securities in the
possession of an outside party.  The Pool’s guidelines provide that investments are delivered to and held by
a third-party custodian, which holds the Pool’s securities in the S tate of Oregon’s name.  All trades where
applicable are executed by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securiti es are deposited in an eligible
financial institution prior to the release of funds.
C.  Concentration of credit risk
Concentration of credit risk is the risk of loss attributed to the magnitude of a fund’s investment in a single
issuer.  The Pool guidelines provide that the maximum that may be invested in any one issuer, as a percentage
of the Pool’s total investments is five percent, excluding the OSTF, U.S. Treasuries or U.S. Federal Agencies
or instrumentalities.  The Pool may invest up to 100 percent in those securities.   On June 30, 2024, the Pool
did not hold investments with any one issuer that exceeded these limits.  Further, no more than 5 percent of
the Pool’s investments were with any one issuer apart from US government securities and the Oregon Short
Term Fund.
Investment Type
Weighted
Average
M
odified
Duration
Reported
Amount AAA AA A BBB BB B No t Rated Exe mpt
Asset-Backed Securities 1.10 33,975 $      17,331 $    9,921 $     3,296 $     3,427 $     - $       - $       - $        - $
Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities 1.94 451              451            -           -           -           -          -          -           -
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (1) 5.29 19,015         -             17,407      1,515        -           -          -          -           93
Municipal Debt 1.26 316              316            -           -           -           -          -          -           -
Corporate Debt 4.30 65,283         -             143           9,466        51,582      3,414       678          -           -
U.S. Treasury Debt 4.00 189,728       -             -           -           -           -          -          -           189,728
External Investment Pool (2) 0.25 37,548         -             -           -           -           -          -          37,548      -
Total 346,316 $    18,098 $    27,471 $   14,277 $   55,009 $   3,414 $    678 $       37,548 $   189,821 $
(1) U.S. federal debt carries an implicit guarantee of the U.S. Government.  For credit quality rules, federal debt is considered to be highest quality, except when rated differently.
(2) The Oregon Short Term Fund is not rated by the credit ratings agencies.  The composite credit quality rating of the OSTF's holdings was  AA at June 30, 2024.
(3) Securities rated BB or lower on this table have been downgraded during the past fiscal year.  The positions have been reviewed and retained at the Senior Investment Officer's discretion per the rules above.
Interest Rate Risk and Credit Risk
(Dollars in Thousands)
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2024
D. Foreign currency risk
The Pool guidelines prohibit investments that are not  U.S. dollar-denominated; therefore, the Pool is not
exposed to this risk.
(3)  Securities Lending
The OST has authorized its custodian to act as its agent in the lending of the Pool ’s securities pursuant to a
form of loan agreement, in accordance with Pool  investment policies.  There have been no significant
violations of the provisions of the securities lending agreement.  The State’s securities lending agent lent
short-term and fixed income securities and received as collateral U.S. dollar -denominated cash.  Borrowers
were required to deliver cash collateral for each loan equal to not less than 102 percent of the market value
of the loaned security.  The State may pledge or sell the collateral securities received only in the event of a
borrower default.  The State has the ability to impose restrictions during the year on the amount of the loans
that the securities lending agent made on its behalf, but did not impose any such limits during the year ended
June 30, 2024.  The State is fully indemnified by its securities lending agent against losses due to borrower
default.  There were no losses during the year from the failure of borrowers to return loaned securities.
The Pool’s lending agent uses a fund to reinvest cash collateral received on behalf of the OITP and other
Oregon state agencies managed by the OST, exclusive of the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund.
There were no securities on loan at June 30, 2024.
The State and borrowers maintained the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand.  As
a consequence the maturities of investments made with cash collateral generally do not match the maturities
of the securities loans.  As of June 30, 2024, the State had no credit risk exposure to borrowers  related to
securities on loan.
(4)     Management Fees
In accordance with ORS 293.718, the OST may deduct monthly 0.5 basis points of the most recent market
value of assets under management for administration and portfolio management.  For the year ended June 30,
2024 the OST charged the Pool a monthly rate of 0.435 basis points based on assets under management in
the Pool.  Fees are deducted from investment income before distributions to participants.  Fees and other
expenses charged to the Pool totaled $213 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2024.
(5)   Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.   Observable inputs are developed
based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity.  Unobservable inputs are
developed based on the best information available about the assumptions market participants would use in
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2024
pricing the asset.  The classification of securities within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the activity
level in the market for the security type and the inputs used to determine their fair value, as follows:
• Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
• Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or
similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model- derived valuations in which all
significant inputs are observable.
• Level 3 – Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are unobservable.
Lev el 1 Lev el 2 Lev el 3 Total
Investm ents:
Asset-Backed Securities -$                   33,975$             -$                   33,975$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -                     451                    -                     451
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities -                     19,015               -                     19,015
Municipal Debt -                     316                    -                     316
Corporate Debt -                     65,283               -                     65,283
U.S. Treasury Debt -                     189,728             -                     189,728
Total -$                  308,768$         -$                  308,768$
Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value as of June 30, 2024
Fair Value Measurements
(Dollars in Thousands)
The Pool’s investments, other than those with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days, are valued
using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent pricing vendors.  The third-party vendors use
a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate relevant observable market data to arrive
at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace would pay for a security under current market conditions.
Investments with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days are carried at amortized cost, which
approximates fair value.  All of the Pool’s investments at June 30, 2024 are considered level 2.
OTHER REPORTS
Kip Memmott
Division Director
2 55 Capitol St NE, Ste 180
Salem, Oregon 97310
LaVonne Griffin -Valade Cheryl Myers  Information (503) 986-2255
Oregon Secretary of State  Deputy Secretary & Tribal Liaison sos.oregon.gov/audits
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial
Reporting and on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an
Audit of Financial Statements Performed in Accordance With
Government Auditing Standards
The Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
The Honorable Tobias Read, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to ﬁnancial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, the ﬁnancial statements Oregon Intermediate Term
Pool, an internal investment pool of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2024, and
the related notes to the ﬁnancial statements, which collectively comprise the Oregon Intermediate Term
Pool’ s basic ﬁnancial statements, and have issued our report thereon dated September 17, 2024.
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the ﬁnancial statements, we considered the Oregon State
Treasury’ s (department) internal control over ﬁnancial reporting (internal control) as a basis for designing
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the
ﬁnancial statements, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
department’s internal control. Accordingly , we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the
department’s internal control.
A deﬁciency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management
or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and
correct, misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deﬁciency , or a combination of
deﬁciencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of
the entity’s ﬁnancial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis. A
signiﬁcant deﬁciency is a deﬁciency , or a combination of deﬁciencies, in internal control that is less severe
than a material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the ﬁrst paragraph of this
section and was not designed to identify all deﬁciencies in internal control that might be material
weaknesses or signiﬁcant deﬁciencies. Given these limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
Audits Division
deﬁciencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However , material weaknesses
or signiﬁcant deﬁciencies may exist that were not identiﬁed.
Report on Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the department’s ﬁnancial statements are free
from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material
effect on the ﬁnancial statements. However , providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was
not an objective of our audit, and accordingly , we do not express such an opinion. The results of our tests
disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under
Government Auditing Standards.
Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance
and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the department’s
internal control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards in considering the department’s internal control and compliance.
Accordingly , this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
State of Oregon
September 17, 2024