Kip Memmott
Division Director
Oregon Health Insurance
Marketplace Fiscal Year 2024
Compliance
April 2025
Report 2025-12
Introduction
Oregon Secretary of State April 2025
Report 2025-12 page 1
Background
In March 2015, Senate Bill 1 designated the Department of Consumer and Business Services to operate
Oregon’s health insurance exchange — an online marketplace that enables individuals and employers to
shop, compare plans, and access financial assistance to help pay for insurance coverage. Operations of
the Oregon health insurance exchange was transferred to the Oregon Health Authority effective July 1,
2021, pursuant to Senate Bill 65 (2021 Legislative Regular Session).
The Oregon Health Insurance Marketplace (OHIM) is one of only three1 state-based exchanges that uses
the federal marketplace platform for eligibility and enrollment (referred to as an SBE-FP).
Complying with the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) is important to ensure state health exchanges are
functioning to allow eligible citizens to enroll in qualified health plans.
Under the terms of the SBE-FP agreement, OHIM is responsible for educating consumers, working with
agents and community partners providing consumer assistance, certifying qualified health plans, and
maintaining the integrity of data and the security of personal information.
Audit Objectives, Scope, and Methodology
Objectives
The objectives of this audit were to conduct the following for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2024:
 Verify OHIM’s compliance with programmatic requirements set forth by 45 CFR part 155;
 Report on compliance as directed by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS); and
 Fulfill the requirements of a performance audit as directed in Oregon Revised Statute 741.220.
Scope
We performed this audit of the state fiscal year ended June 30, 2024, in accordance with the requirements
of 45 CFR part 155 as directed by CMS and clarified by the SBE-FP agreement. Because Oregon utilizes
the federal platform for enrollment and eligibility, our scope was limited to verifying compliance with those
sections of 45 CFR part 155 applicable to the structure of OHIM as an SBE-FP as follows:
Subpart C — General Functions of an Exchange
.205 Consumer assistance tools and programs of an Exchange
.210 Navigator program standard
.215 Standards applicable to navigators and non-navigator assistance personnel carrying out
consumer assistance functions
1 As of last update August 28, 2024, per CMS.gov.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2025
Report 2025-12 page 2
.220 Ability of States to permit agents and brokers and web-brokers to assist qualified individuals,
qualified employers, or qualified employees enrolling in Qualified Health Plans (QHPs)
.225 Certified application counselors
.260 Privacy and security of personally identifiable information
Subpart K — Exchange Functions: Certification of QHP
.1000 Certification standards for QHPs
.1010 Certification process for QHPs
.1020 QHP issuer rate and benefit information
.1030 QHP certification standards related to advance payments of the premium tax credit and
cost-sharing reductions
.1040 Transparency in coverage
.1045 Accreditation timeline
.1050 Establishment of Exchange network adequacy standards
.1055 Service area of a QHP
.1065 Stand-alone dental plans
.1075 Recertification of QHPs
.1080 Decertification of QHPs
Methodology
We performed our audit of OHIM’s performance by comparing actual operations, practices, and results
against the stated requirements of 45 CFR part 155, subparts C and K, and the federal platform agreement
with CMS, identifying the specific exchange functions for which Oregon is responsible. We interviewed
OHIM personnel and reviewed customer and community partner resources on OHIM’s website. We
performed a review and analysis of OHIM documentation including contracts, agreements, and policies
and procedures applicable to the compliance objectives.
We conducted this audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a
reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit
objectives.
Auditors from our office, not involved with the audit, reviewed our report for accuracy, checking facts and
conclusions against our supporting evidence.
Audit Results
Oregon Secretary of State April 2025
Report 2025-12 page 3
General Functions of an Exchange (Subpart C)
Consumer Assistance Programs
Criteria: OHIM is required, under 45 CFR part 155.205, to establish a toll-free telephone hotline, an up-to
date website, accessibility for individuals with disabilities and those with limited English proficiency,
consumer assistance performed by trained assisters, and outreach and education.
Methodology: We reviewed information posted on OHIM’s website, the operation of the toll-free telephone
hotline, accessibility, training of assisters, and outreach and educational activities.
Navigator Program
Criteria: OHIM is required, under 45 CFR part 155.210(a), to establish a navigator program through which
it awards grants to eligible entities or individuals. OHIM has established community partner and agent
partner programs that provide grants to nonprofit and community organizations and insurance agencies to
provide education, outreach, enrollment, and marketing activities. As an SBE-FP, OHIM must ensure that
navigators and partners complete required training and comply with rules of conduct and applicable
statutory and regulatory requirements, including consumer assistance, outreach and education, and
privacy and security requirements.
Methodology: We reviewed community partner grant contracts to ensure they included required training
for key personnel and required privacy and security of personally identifiable and health information.
Grantees and partners provide metric reports to OHIM on the outcome of outreach, education, and
enrollment activities. We reviewed a selection of these metric reports to ensure they verified participation in
these activities.
Agents and Brokers
Criteria: Agents and brokers who assist with enrollment in QHPs must obtain training and register with the
federal exchange in advance of assisting with enrollment. In accordance with 45 CFR part 155.220, OHIM
must limit the information provided on its website to include only licensed agents and brokers who have
completed training and are registered with the federal exchange.
Methodology: We reviewed a sample of 23 agents and brokers listed on OHIM’s “Find Local Help” website
for compliance with training and registration requirements.
Certified Application and Counselor Program
Criteria: OHIM must have a certified application counselor (CAC) program that complies with 45 CFR part
155.225.
Under this program, volunteers and staff at local nonprofits or other organizations assist with enrollment.
These individuals must complete the required training to be certified to perform this function.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2025
Report 2025-12 page 4
Methodology: We reviewed the contract executed between OHIM and OHA for inclusion of federal
requirements to train and certify the volunteers and staff of community partners as CACs before assisting
with QHP applications.
Privacy and Security Safeguards
Criteria: OHIM must establish and implement privacy and security standards and safeguards for
personally identifiable information (PII) that are consistent with the principles listed in 45 CFR part 155.260.
Methodology: We reviewed the types of PII OHIM receives, reviewed OHIM policies and procedures, data
sharing agreements with partner agencies and CMS, contract agreements, and agency-wide security
measures put in place to safeguard unauthorized access to PII.
Conclusion
Based on our review of operations during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2024, OHIM complied with
requirements applicable to state-based marketplaces using a federal platform under 45 CFR part 155,
subsection C.
Exchange Functions: Certification of Qualified Health Plans (Subpart K)
Certification, Recertification, and Decertification of Qualified Health Plans
Criteria: OHIM must establish procedures to certify, recertify, and decertify QHPs consistent with 45 CFR
part 155.1000-.1080. OHIM must certify the plans prior to the beginning of open enrollment. If a carrier is no
longer in compliance with exchange participation requirements, OHIM may decertify a carrier’s plans.
Methodology: We reviewed OHIM’s procedures for certifying, recertifying, and decertifying QHPs and
insurance carriers. We reviewed the filings of the six carriers offering plans in OHIM for plan year 2024 to
verify the carrier’s plans were certified prior to open enrollment, and the carrier was licensed to sell
insurance in Oregon. No plans were decertified for plan year 2024.
QHP Issuer Justification for Rate Increases
Criteria: OHIM must ensure that QHP issuers submit justification for rate increases in accordance with 45
CFR part 155.1020 prior to increasing rates. OHIM must review and approve the rate increase and provide
access to the justification on its website.
Methodology: We reviewed rate increase justifications submitted by the six QHP carriers in OHIM to
ensure OHIM reviewed the increases and made the justifications available on their website as required.
Conclusion
Based on our review of operations during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2024, OHIM complied with
requirements applicable to state-based marketplaces using a federal platform under 45 CFR part 155,
subsection K.
About the Audit
Oregon Secretary of State April 2025
Report 2025-12 page 5
We sincerely appreciate the courtesies and cooperation extended by officials and employees of OHA
during the course of this audit.
ABOUT THE SECRETARY OF STATE AUDITS DIVISION
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of
Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the Secretary of State and
is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon
government. The Secretary of State has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards
and commissions as well as administer municipal audit law.
Sarah Anderson, CPA, Audit Manager
Austin Moore, Lead Auditor
Morgan Blankers, Staff Auditor
Evelyn Rodriguez-Vivar, Staff Auditor
Secretary of State Tobias Read
Audits Director Steve Bergmann
This report is intended to promote the best possible
management of public resources.
Copies may be obtained from:
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits