Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
Inadequate Safety Inspections
and Poor Asset Tracking
Increase Risk to Public Safety
and Property
April 2026
Report 2026-11
Secretary of State Tobias Read
Audits Director Steve Bergmann
Audit Summary
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
Inadequate Safety Inspections and Poor Asset Tracking Increase
Risk to Public Safety and Property
OBJECTIVE
Determine whether the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department (OPRD) has established and implemented effective
processes for managing key asset information to support proper asset management, including accurate documentation of
asset details such as cost or replacement value, important dates, and required safety inspections within the Oregon Parks
and Recreation Information System (OPRIS).
SCOPE
Our scope was limited to the review of asset management practices at OPRD overnight campgrounds which offer tent and
RV camping, have restrooms, and are reservable. Additionally, we tested selected park properties for compliance with
OPRD and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) building safety inspection requirements. The audit
period covered June 2022 through June 2025.
Consistent safety protocols help OPRD protect the public, the department’s volunteers, and employees.
Reliable asset records are essential for safeguarding public property and ensuring resources are available to support park
operations.
OPRD’s compliance with asset and safety requirements promotes accountability and reduces the state’s exposure to legal
and financial risks.
Safety inspections are not consistently conducted or documented.  (pg. 6)
OPRD does not consistently complete or record the required quarterly safety inspections for buildings where employees
work, potentially creating safety, financial, and legal risks. OSHA rules and OPRD policy require these inspections and
records, but we found evidence of noncompliance at the parks we visited, with one park having no records for 2022-25.
OPRD was recently cited by OSHA after unaddressed hazards were found in a concessionaire operated building that
Why this audit is important
What we found
OPRD owns. Incomplete or outdated policies, unclear staff roles, and problems with the OPRIS system — such as poor
mobile access — make the issue worse. These problems could lead to unsafe practices that may cause injuries or fines.
OPRD has gaps in its asset management practices and oversight . (pg. 8)
OPRD's asset management system contains unreliable data, risking asset loss, misreporting, and inadequate insurance.
Our review found missing or inconsistent records, untracked assets like utility trailers, automated external defibrillators and
iPhones, and assets incorrectly listed as inactive or missing. The report OPRD uses to ensure proper insurance coverage of
state-owned assets had some undervalued or inactive entries, and several assets lacked ID tags. These issues are due in
part to outdated policies, inconsistent procedures, limited accountability, and system flaws.
To reduce the risks of injuries or deaths, lawsuits, fines, and avoidable financial losses due to lack of compliance with
building safety inspection requirements, we recommend OPRD:
1. Finalize and roll out policies and procedures requiring quarterly safety inspections of employee-occupied structures,
with clearly defined roles and responsibilities for execution and oversight, including documentation standards.
a. Require managers to regularly review asset records for inspection completion and documentation, and ensure
these responsibilities are included in supervisory performance expectations.
b. Review and update asset records to ensure buildings and other structures where employees work are assigned
appropriate recurring inspection tasks.
To strengthen asset management practices, we recommend OPRD:
2. Ensure compliance with asset management policies and procedures across all parks and program areas including:
a. Asset data integrity and ID tagging, Property Disposition Requests, and the safety inspection program.
3. Update OPRD’s asset management guidance, including clear procedures for currently uncovered asset types such as
Infrastructure and Transportation.
a. Include standards for asset entry and updates, documenting acquisitions, Property Disposition Requests,
reassignment, inspections, and tagging.
4. Provide recurring training to all relevant personnel on asset management policies, including tagging, record-keeping,
and disposal procedures, and reinforce expectations through performance evaluations or other accountability
mechanisms to ensure compliance.
5. Identify untagged assets and ensure tagging and data entry are completed in accordance with policy, and update tag
information within the asset management system.
6. Implement periodic reconciliations between OPRD’s asset management system, Risk Reports, and physical asset
inspections to ensure records are accurate and up-to-date. The reconciliations should:
a. Be performed by staff not assigned to the park property under review.
b. Include spot checks of acquisition documentation, tagging, and location data.
7. Enforce the existing two-signature policy for Property Disposition Requests through system controls or supervisory
review and conduct a retrospective review of all asset dispositions for compliance. Follow up on all improperly
processed requests.
What we recommend
As OPRD continues its efforts to replace OPRIS with a new asset management system:
8. Ensure the new system has all required fields necessary for accurate reporting with the Department of Administrative
Service’s annual Risk Report, and ensure key fields require input before an asset can be logged.
a. Choose a system that works on mobile devices, even when there is no internet or cell signal.
OPRD agreed with all of our recommendations. The response can be found at the end of the report.
Agency response
Read the full audit report
Scan the QR code to read the full audit report, including the agency response, on our website.
Introduction
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 1
The Oregon Parks and Recreation Department (OPRD) provides the public with recreational opportunities,
experiences, and education, and preserves historical sites and artifacts. OPRD also regulates the state’s
scenic waterways and coastal projects through its Ocean Shores program. Additionally, OPRD oversees
certain regulations and standards for all-terrain vehicle usage on all public lands where such use is allowed,
such as the sand dunes on the Oregon coast.
Smith Rock State Park
OPRD’s mission is to provide and protect outstanding natural, scenic, cultural, historic and recreational
sites for the enjoyment and education of present and future generations. OPRD and its director are
overseen by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Commission, consisting of seven members who are
appointed by the Governor.
OPRD oversees a broad and complex network of parks and services
Like other natural resource agencies, OPRD is spread across Oregon with hundreds of properties to
upkeep and manage. OPRD shares similarities to a hospitality business by serving over 51 million visitors
and 2.6 million campers annually. These visitors are not only Oregonians but include those from outside
the state too.
The state’s park system encompasses over 250 properties across 113,125 acres of parkland, including
362 miles of public ocean shore. OPRD doesn’t just manage park and trail systems; it also operates many
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 2
rest areas it retained when it separated from the Oregon Department of Transportation in 1989. OPRD also
performs regulatory functions via programs like the State Historic Preservation Office, which serves to
preserve and manage historical sites and artifacts.
The park system spans three regions: coastal, valley, and mountain (east of the Cascades). Each region’s
staffing structure consists of a region director, resource manager, operations manager, district managers,
park managers, individual park supervisors, full-time park rangers, park specialists, seasonal park ranger
assistants, and volunteer park hosts.
Figure 1: OPRD manages hundreds of properties across the state
Source: OPRD
Parks with overnight stay options, like campgrounds and cabins, generally have at least one volunteer park
host, a permanent ranger, and one or more seasonal ranger assistants during the peak seasons. Some
campgrounds in the mountain region are closed during the off-season as OPRD cuts back seasonal staff.
Most park locations remain operational in the winter months, such as properties on the coast and in the
valley, where weather tends to be milder than other regions of the state.
OPRD contracts with concessionaires who provide services and experiences to park visitors.
Concessionaire offerings include food services and recreational opportunities such as kayaking, paddle
boating, and bungee jumping. OPRD is looking into expanding these offerings to further deliver on its
mission.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 3
Paddle boat rentals | Source: Photo taken by auditors at Jessie M. Honeyman Memorial State Park
OPRD has several funding streams, with the largest coming from the Oregon Lottery
OPRD has distinct funding streams in its budget to sustain properties and operations for present and future
generations of visitors to enjoy. OPRD’s largest source of funding comes from Oregon Lottery revenues.
This funding source fluctuates depending on the state’s economy and popularity of lottery gaming. OPRD
also receives General Fund dollars to cover interest payments from previous General Obligation Bonds
approved for one-time capital projects. The agency does not receive any General Fund for operations.
Another significant revenue source is from Other Funds, which includes fees paid by park visitors, sales of
off-road permits for all-terrain vehicles, and a share of fuel tax revenues from gasoline used in off-road
vehicles. Other Funds also include a share of recreational vehicle registration revenues transferred from
the Oregon Department of Transportation, which OPRD uses to maintain park roads and rest areas.
Park user fees for the 2023-25 biennium were $67.6 million. In 2025, with fiscal uncertainties projected in
the 2027-29 biennium, OPRD raised user fees for various amenities including overnight fees, day-use
parking and more. As a result, some locations began collecting parking fees for the first time.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 4
Figure 2: OPRD’s budget relies on Lottery and Other funding with minimal federal and General Fund sources
2023-25 Legislative ly Approved  2025-27 Legislatively Adopted
General Fund  $8,590,960 $6,726,750
Lottery Funds  $170,037,598 $205,855,941
Other Funds  $174,406,164 $152,034,347
Federal Funds  $21,868,180 $28,783,142
Total  $374,902,902 $393,400,180
Positions  871 865
Full-Time Equivalent (FTE)  632.30 629.4
Source: Oregon Legislature
With hundreds of properties across Oregon, OPRD manages thousands of
assets from historic lighthouses to yurts
Oregon’s landscape is diverse. Each region has its own challenges for park management and offers
different experiences for visitors. OPRD aims to give visitors a high-quality experience while operating
efficiently.
To this end, OPRD manages a large and complex set of assets: roads, parking lots, RV dump stations,
utility systems, amphitheaters, lighthouses, playgrounds, cabins, yurts, boat docks, restrooms, and a wide
range of vehicles and equipment. Many of OPRD’s more than 2,000 buildings are over 50 years old with
some beyond their expected lifespans. This aging infrastructure requires significant maintenance,
sometimes with specific historic considerations, and increases operating costs.
OPRD uses the Oregon Parks and Recreation Information System (OPRIS) to manage its key assets.
OPRD built the OPRIS system in house during the early 2000s; it was previously called the “Hub.”
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 5
Figure 3: An illustration of some typical assets managed by OPRD
A collage of park assets | Source: Pictures taken by auditors during site visits
It’s critical for state agencies to have accurate asset inventory and recordkeeping to effectively manage
assets. Agencies are required to annually report their assets to the Department of Administrative Services
(DAS) in their annual Risk Report. DAS provides insurance coverage for OPRD assets in case they are
damaged, destroyed, or lost. If assets are not correctly reported, insurance coverage may be inadequate
and claims may be denied, leaving agencies responsible for the cost.
Like many employers, OPRD follows safety practices established to prevent avoidable
injuries and unsafe conditions
OPRD’s facilities are subject to state and federal regulations enforced by the Oregon Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA), which include regular safety inspections. These regulations are
intended to protect employees and, because many OPRD facilities are accessible to the public, volunteers,
and contractors, also help reduce safety risks for those who enter OPRD buildings.
Under Oregon law, employers are responsible for conducting their own workplace safety inspections rather
than relying on routine inspections by OSHA, which has limited capacity for proactive enforcement.
Instead, OSHA offers consultation services to assist employers in understanding and complying with
applicable state and federal safety requirements.
OPRD has a standardized safety checklist for park staff to use when conducting building inspections. The
checklist covers a range of facility features and conditions commonly addressed in workplace safety
programs, such as building exterior and interior conditions, storage of hazardous materials, fire safety
features, and physical hazards such as exposed electrical wiring.
Audit Results
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 6
We found OPRD doesn’t consistently complete or document required OSHA building inspections. When
inspections are missed or aren’t recorded, it could lead to injuries to the public and reduce confidence in
the safety of Oregon’s parks. These gaps could affect staff safety, limit OPRD’s ability to identify hazards
early and respond properly and may result in regulatory fines.
We also found weaknesses in how OPRD tracks and manages its assets. Assets aren’t always accurately
recorded in OPRD’s system or in the annual Risk Report DAS uses to determine insurance coverage.
Some assets are undervalued, while others aren’t recorded at all. Some asset management policies,
procedures, and guidance are outdated, and there is a lack of clarity in the processes and expectations of
staff. Some staff also were not following required steps when disposing of assets.
These inconsistencies increase the risk of waste and inefficiency. For instance, OPRD must manually
synthesize asset inventory for all parks when preparing to send DAS the annual Risk Report for insurance
coverage. These problems increase the risk of lost or misreported property and limit OPRD’s ability to
protect public resources, plan for repairs and replacements, and make sound financial decisions.
Weak oversight of OPRD’s safety inspection programs may expose visitors
and staff to hazards and result in regulatory fines
At the time of the audit, OPRD lacked sufficient procedures and adequate oversight to ensure compliance
with OSHA’s quarterly safety inspection requirements. OPRD couldn’t demonstrate these inspections
were consistently completed or that required records were maintained; in one location operated by a
concessionaire, this resulted in an OSHA investigation and fine.
Failure to complete and retain records of safety inspections increases the risk of unaddressed hazards,
potential injuries, and additional financial and operational impacts. Because OPRD manages properties
with significant inherent safety risks, consistent oversight of safety requirements is essential to protecting
both the public and the department.
Building inspections are not consistently performed and documented per OSHA
requirements
OPRD operates hundreds of properties across the state, many of which are used daily by the public,
volunteers, and OPRD personnel. Both OSHA regulations and OPRD’s policies require quarterly safety
inspections of park structures, and OPRD’s employee and volunteer policy mandates documentation and
three-year retention of all inspection records.
Despite these requirements, we found inspections weren’t consistently performed and documented. One
of the parks we visited had no records of building inspections from 2022 to 2025.
OPRD managers said missed inspections or lack of documentation were due to competing priorities,
including prioritizing customer service — that is, being responsive to park visitors and emergent situations
over ensuring records are kept accurately. However, OPRD’s safety policy clearly states that managers
must ensure employees and volunteers understand and follow OPRD’s safety inspection policy and
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 7
procedures. Although the policy explicitly lays out this expectation, the lack of consistent inspection
records demonstrates that OPRD is not adequately enforcing it.
Incomplete policies and procedures, and limitations within OPRIS, are also contributing factors. At the time
of the audit, OPRD had begun to develop policies and procedures for conducting and documenting OSHA
inspections appropriately within OPRIS. But these policies and procedures need to be finalized and
deployed.
Conducting and documenting inspections in OPRIS is difficult and inefficient. OPRIS doesn’t have built-in
fields, templates, or tasks that could be easily filled out by OPRD staff when they are out in the field. In
addition, we found examples of buildings not being properly categorized in OPRIS, meaning the required
safety inspections weren’t assigned. Without the assigned task, staff aren’t prompted to complete an
inspection.
OPRD personnel told us system accessibility issues hinder their ability to comply with policies and
procedures. While OPRIS can be used on tablets and mobile phones, access is granted only via web
browser when the device is connected to an OPRD virtual private network. This limitation is problematic in
remote areas, or in those with limited or no cellular or internet service. The challenges with OPRIS have led
OPRD management to begin pursuing a new asset management system.
These system challenges, combined with insufficient managerial oversight, have led to noncompliance
with inspection requirements.
Unaddressed safety risks can lead to injury or death as well as legal and financial
consequences
Inspections are intended to keep employees — and, in OPRD’s case, the public — safe, but in the past
three years, OPRD received three OSHA citations related to safety violations.1 These three fines cost the
department nearly $10,000.
One citation was linked to a concessionaire-operated building where OPRD and the concessionaire failed
to identify and address hazards due to a lack of inspection. The others involved failing to check for lead
paint hazards and using improperly trained forklift operators. Failure to perform safety inspections
increases the likelihood that hazards within OPRD structures would go undetected and unmitigated,
putting the public, volunteers, or OPRD personnel at risk of injury, or worst-case scenario, death.
There can be financial consequences, too. Beyond the thousands of dollars in fines associated with OSHA
citations, these shortcomings could expose OPRD to significant legal liability if someone is harmed, or if
insurance claims are denied due to neglected maintenance. OPRD has already indicated to the Legislature
that it faces a budget deficit in the 2027-29 biennium without having to contend with avoidable costs like
citations and lawsuits.
1 OSHA inspections are for employee safety only. However, since so many buildings OPRD employees work in (restrooms, yurts,
cabins, visitor centers, etc.) are also used by the public, these inspections extend enhanced safety to all.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 8
OPRD’s inadequate asset management practices and oversight expose the
state to risk of loss, misreporting, and inadequate insurance coverage
OPRD is required to track and document all capital assets and certain non-capital assets.2 Our review of
selected parks found inconsistent and inaccurate asset records, both onsite and in OPRIS. Both DAS Risk
Management and a prior internal audit made OPRD leadership aware that many capital assets were
missing replacement values, which limited OPRD’s ability to secure full insurance coverage. In the 2024
annual Risk Report, OPRD’s assets were listed at more than $1 billion in replacement value, including
assets that were undervalued.
Inaccurate or incomplete asset records increase the risk of theft, loss, unrecouped damages, and legal
liability. They can also create safety risks for staff, visitors, volunteers, and contractors who rely on
accurate information about the condition and location of assets.
Many assets are not accurately captured in OPRD’s asset management system or the
Risk Report that DAS uses to determine insurance coverage
We reviewed asset records for a sample of parks and found 38% of assets were missing key information in
OPRIS — specifically, acquisition date and cost. This information is needed to estimate replacement value,
which helps DAS Risk Management determine the amounts of insurance coverage.
During site visits, we also saw weak asset management practices. Many assets were missing ID tags, a
couple of assets were listed as being at other parks, and one asset, a gas-powered backpack blower, was
marked inactive with a Property Disposition Request on file indicating it had been lost years ago. We also
found assets in the field like utility trailers, an automated external defibrillator, and iPhones that were not
listed in OPRIS at all, even though OPRD policy requires they be documented. We compared several
capital assets between OPRIS and the Risk Report and found other inconsistencies, such as two assets
that were inactive in OPRIS but listed as active on the Risk Report.
These types of gaps have already caused financial losses. After being destroyed by a fire, a $50,000 trash
compactor had to be replaced using OPRD funds because it wasn’t listed in OPRIS or the Risk Report.
According to DAS Risk Management, some assets that were damaged during the 2020 Labor Day wildfires
were undervalued. For instance, Collier State Park suffered wildfire damage to a historical logging
collection, but DAS denied coverage because OPRD did not put the collection in the Risk Report. The
value of these lost assets is unknown.
2 A capital asset is defined as property with initial cost or donated value of $5,000 or more.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 9
A $50,000 OPRD trash compactor was destroyed by a fire | Source: OPRD
These problems are not new. A 2024 OPRD internal audit also found many historic buildings and
structures lacked proper replacement values. While OPRD and DAS Risk Management are aware of these
issues, OPRD is behind on the mitigation schedule it provided in response to the findings, citing difficulty in
valuing historic assets. OPRD management has implemented a multi-year plan to add missing building
values to the Risk Report.
Missing or undervalued assets expose OPRD to avoidable and substantial financial risk. Without accurate
records and replacement values, OPRD may bear the entire cost of damage, destruction, or theft. When
insurance coverage falls short, OPRD simply cannot replace what is lost — in some cases, permanently
diminishing the invaluable resources available to future generations.
When we reviewed Property Disposition Requests from selected parks, we found staff were not
consistently following OPRD’s procedures for disposing of assets. OPRD requires two signatures, but
several forms had only one. Staff must complete a Property Disposition Request whenever an asset is
removed, replaced, transferred, sent to surplus, or discarded, and save it in OPRIS. We also found several
capital assets in OPRIS missing the required report after they were removed or replaced at a park. Without
consistent documentation, OPRD cannot verify what happened to state-owned property, increasing the
risk of errors, loss, or misuse and limiting the reliability of its asset records. These gaps also make it harder
for OPRD to reconcile park-level disposals with enterprise-wide property disposition requirements.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 10
OPRD must improve policies, training, and oversight to reduce the risk of public harm
and financial loss
OPRD has policies, procedures, and a system guide for managing assets, but we found them to be
outdated or incomplete. Furthermore, at the parks we visited, we observed insufficient oversight and
enforcement as parks staff were not following the policies and procedures that were in place at the time of
the audit. This lack of oversight contributes to inconsistent and inaccurate entries in OPRIS.
In addition to these inconsistencies, the fixed asset accountant must complete a lengthy, manual process
each year to produce the annual Risk Report. Park staff must verify their assets against a separate
spreadsheet before the accountant can compile and submit the information required by DAS for insurance
coverage.
OPRD personnel explained that customer service pressures and emergent operations interruptions
contributed to missed inspections and documentation. Effective asset management is an essential part of
delivering on OPRD’s stewardship responsibilities to Oregonians. When safety inspections and asset
documentation are incomplete or inaccurate, the resulting risks, particularly to public safety and trust, can
overshadow the positive work OPRD does.
To avoid preventable hazards and costly asset repairs or replacements, OPRD needs to ensure asset
documentation is accurate and aligns with policies and laws. OPRD could achieve this by updating and
standardizing policies; providing staff with structured, routine training on safety and asset management;
and conducting continuous oversight and monitoring to ensure compliance.
Recommendations
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 11
To reduce the risks of injuries or deaths, lawsuits, fines, and avoidable financial losses due to lack of
compliance with building safety inspection requirements, we recommend OPRD:
1. Finalize and roll out policies and procedures requiring quarterly safety inspections of employee-
occupied structures, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities for execution and oversight,
including documentation standards.
a. Require managers to regularly review asset records for inspection completion and
documentation, and ensure these responsibilities are included in supervisory performance
expectations.
b. Review and update asset records to ensure buildings and other structures where employees
work are assigned appropriate recurring inspection tasks.
To strengthen asset management practices, we recommend OPRD:
2. Ensure compliance with asset management policies and procedures across all parks and program
areas including:
a. Asset data integrity and ID tagging, Property Disposition Requests, and the safety inspection
program.
3. Update OPRD’s asset management guidance, including clear procedures for currently uncovered
asset types such as Infrastructure and Transportation.
a. Include standards for asset entry and updates, documenting acquisitions, Property Disposition
Requests, reassignment, inspections, and tagging.
4. Provide recurring training to all relevant personnel on asset management policies, including tagging,
record-keeping, and disposal procedures, and reinforce expectations through performance
evaluations or other accountability mechanisms to ensure compliance.
5. Identify untagged assets and ensure tagging and data entry are completed in accordance with policy,
and update tag information within the asset management system.
6. Implement periodic reconciliations between OPRD’s asset management system, Risk Reports, and
physical asset inspections to ensure records are accurate and up-to-date. The reconciliations should:
a. Be performed by staff not assigned to the park property under review.
b. Include spot checks of acquisition documentation, tagging, and location data.
7. Enforce the existing two-signature policy for Property Disposition Requests through system controls or
supervisory review and conduct a retrospective review of all asset dispositions for compliance. Follow
up on all improperly processed requests.
Recommendations
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 12
As OPRD continues its efforts to replace OPRIS with a new asset management system:
8. Ensure the new system has all required fields necessary for accurate reporting with Department of
Administrative Service’s annual Risk Report, and ensure key fields require input before an asset can
be logged.
a. Choose a system that works on mobile devices, even when there is no internet or cell signal.
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 13
OBJECTIVE
Determine whether OPRD has established and implemented effective processes for managing key asset
information to support proper asset management, including accurate documentation of asset details such
as cost or replacement value, important dates, and required safety inspections within OPRIS.
SCOPE
This audit assessed the internal control framework of OPRD’s asset management and safety inspection
practices at three overnight campgrounds (Jessie M. Honeyman Memorial State Park Campground,
Tumalo State Park, and Memaloose State Park) that offer tent and RV camping, have restrooms, and are
reservable. We did not test controls at all campgrounds or OPRD properties. The audit period covered
June 2022 through June 2025.
METHODOLOGY
To meet our objective, we performed the following procedures:
• Interviewed OPRD management including the director, deputy directors, regional managers, and
park managers. We also interviewed personnel within OPRD’s safety and risk program, OPRD’s
fixed asset accountant, and park staff at several parks visited by auditors.
• Interviewed stakeholders at DAS Risk Management and Oregon OSHA.
• Conducted on-site visits to three randomly selected parks that met established selection criteria.
Methodology criteria for selection consisted of requiring one park for each of the three OPRD-
identified regions that fall under a hierarchal organizational structure for operations; as well as
selecting park locations that have reservable overnight camping for tents and RVs and restroom
facilities.3
• Reviewed OPRIS asset management system entries and documentation for a random selection of
parks.
• Obtained and reviewed OPRD policies, procedures, guidance, and training materials, as well as
DAS policies and procedures applicable to our audit objective. Auditors also reviewed the Federal
OSHA and Oregon OSHA administrative rules and requirements.
The sample of parks we reviewed was selected based on defined criteria and was not intended to be
representative of all OPRD sites; therefore, results cannot be projected to the full population. The
procedures performed were sufficient to identify significant control issues relevant to our audit objective.
3 OPRD lists 198 parks on its reservation website. The above criteria narrowed the population of parks for our sample selection to 34
parks.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 14
INTERNAL CONTROL REVIEW
We determined that the following internal controls were relevant to our audit objective.4
Control Environment
o We reviewed OPRD’s governance structure, organizational chart, budget, strategic plans,
and statewide hierarchal and operational structure.
o We assessed tone at the top.
Risk Assessment
o We interviewed OPRD management, risk and safety managers, fixed asset accountant,
park managers, and park staff.
o We also reviewed OPRD’s strategic plan.
Control activities
o We evaluated OPRD policies, procedures, guidance, and other resources on asset
management, and risk and safety.
o We tested compliance with identified control activities over asset management and safety
inspections practices.
Monitoring activities
o We interviewed various levels of OPRD leadership as well as park staff.
o We reviewed a selection of park asset management documentation including OSHA
building inspections.
Deficiencies with these internal controls were documented in the results section of this report.
We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate
evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on
our audit objectives.
We sincerely appreciate the courtesy and cooperation extended by officials and employees of OPRD
during this audit.
4 Auditors relied on standards for internal controls from the U.S. Government Accountability Office, report GAO-25-107721.
Oregon Secretary of State April 2026
Report 2026-11 page 15
ABOUT THE SECRETARY OF STATE AUDITS DIVISION
The Oregon Constitution provides that the Secretary of State shall be, by virtue of the office, Auditor of
Public Accounts. The Audits Division performs this duty. The division reports to the Secretary of State and
is independent of other agencies within the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches of Oregon
government. The Secretary of State has constitutional authority to audit all state officers, agencies, boards
and commissions.
Audit team
Olivia Recheked, MPA, Audit Manager
Kyle Rossi, Principal Auditor
Christina Nichols, Senior Auditor
March 9, 2026   Page | 2
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
practices. We appreciate the Audit Division’s work and look forward to ongoing collaboration as
we follow through on these commitments.
Below is our detailed response to each recommendation in the audit.
RECOMMENDATION 1
Finalize and roll out policies and procedures requiring quarterly safety inspections of
employee-occupied structures, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities for
execution and oversight, including documentation standards.
a. Require managers to regularly review asset records for inspection completion and
documentation, and ensure these responsibilities are included in supervisory
performance expectations.
b. Review and update asset records to ensure buildings and other structures where
employees work are assigned appropriate recurring inspection tasks.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree
December 2026 Patty Smith, 503-979-6015
Narrative for Recommendation 1
OPRD agrees with this recommendation. The agency has already updated its core safety policies
and procedures and communicated these expectations to staff through policy rollouts and related
training efforts. These updates clarify roles, responsibilities, and documentation requirements for
safety practices across the agency.
Over the coming months, OPRD will continue refining its guidance to ensure quarterly safety
inspections for employee occupied structures are consistently scheduled, completed, and
recorded. This includes confirming that supervisory expectations and review responsibilities are
clearly defined.
RECOMMENDATION 2
Ensure compliance with asset management policies and procedures across all parks and
program areas including:
a. Asset data integrity and ID tagging, Property Disposition Requests, and the safety
inspection program.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2027
Alan Freudenthal,
971-446-1944
Narrative for Recommendation 2
OPRD supports this recommendation and has strengthened expectations around asset tagging,
disposition procedures, and data integrity through updated training, staff surveys and staff
guidance. New training debuted in early 2026. These efforts were designed to reinforce
March 9, 2026   Page | 3
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
consistent use of the agency’s asset management system and ensure staff understand the
requirements applicable to their roles.
OPRD will continue improving compliance by refining training materials, providing periodic
refresher sessions, and assigning responsibility for verifying data quality at appropriate intervals.
Recent and future staff surveys and assessments will inform these adjustments to ensure
agencywide consistency.
RECOMMENDATION 3
Update OPRD’s asset management guidance, including clear procedures for currently
uncovered asset types such as Infrastructure and Transportation.
a. Include standards for asset entry and updates, documenting acquisitions, Property
Disposition Requests, reassignment, inspections, and tagging.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2027
Alan Freudenthal,
971-446-1944
Narrative for Recommendation 3
OPRD agrees with this recommendation. The agency has already updated guidance for several
asset categories and delivered supporting training to clarify procedures for entering, updating,
and documenting acquisitions and disposals. These updates were intended to create more
consistent standards across parks.
Additional guidance will be developed for asset types not fully covered in earlier updates,
including Infrastructure and Transportation categories.
RECOMMENDATION 4
Provide recurring training to all relevant personnel on asset management policies,
including tagging, record-keeping, and disposal procedures, and reinforce expectations
through performance evaluations or other accountability mechanisms to ensure
compliance.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2027
Alan Freudenthal,
971-446-1944
Narrative for Recommendation 4
OPRD agrees with this recommendation and has initiated training for staff involved in asset
management activities. These sessions addressed the core requirements of tagging,
documentation, and disposal procedures, and provided an overview of inventory cycles and
expectations.
March 9, 2026   Page | 4
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
To sustain compliance, the agency will establish a regular training schedule and determine how
best to integrate accountability into supervisory review processes or performance expectations.
RECOMMENDATION 5
Identify untagged assets and ensure tagging and data entry are completed in accordance
with policy, and update tag information within the asset management system.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2029
Alan Freudenthal,
971-446-1944
Narrative for Recommendation 5
OPRD agrees with this recommendation. The agency has taken initial steps to strengthen tagging
and data entry practices and recognizes that comprehensive identification of untagged assets is
essential to improving data accuracy.
As part of the broader modernization effort, OPRD is progressing through the required steps to
replace its aging asset management system. The agency is currently undergoing DAS Enterprise
Information Services (EIS) Stage Gate process to begin this project. A new system will support
more consistent tagging, streamline data entry, and allow for improved verification of asset
information. Until that system is in place, the agency will continue working with staff to identify
and properly record untagged assets using existing tools and procedures.
RECOMMENDATION 6
Implement periodic reconciliations between OPRD’s asset management system, Risk
Reports, and physical asset inspections to ensure records are accurate and up-to-date. The
reconciliations should:
a. Be performed by staff not assigned to the park property under review.
b. Include spot checks of acquisition documentation, tagging, and location data.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2027
Sarah Head,
503-508-7316
Narrative for Recommendation 6
OPRD agrees with this recommendation. The agency will implement periodic reconciliations
between its asset management system, Risk Reports, and physical inspections to validate the
accuracy of asset data. This work will include reviewing documentation, verifying tags, and
confirming the accuracy of location information.
To support objectivity, reconciliations will be completed by staff not assigned to the park being
reviewed. Related policy documents will be updated to reflect this expectation and provide
guidance on how spot checks should be conducted.
March 9, 2026   Page | 5
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
RECOMMENDATION 7
Enforce the existing two-signature policy for Property Disposition Requests through
system controls or supervisory review and conduct a retrospective review of all asset
dispositions for compliance. Follow up on all improperly processed requests.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2027
Sarah Head,
503-508-7316
Narrative for Recommendation 7
OPRD agrees with the recommendation and has reinforced the two-signature requirement for
Property Disposition Requests through updated guidance and training materials.
The agency will enhance supervisory review and explore system-based controls to ensure
consistent compliance with the two-signature policy going forward. While a complete
retrospective review would require significant resources, OPRD will make reasonable efforts to
review available past records and address any concerns identified. Our primary focus will be on
strengthening controls and processes going forward to ensure the policy is applied consistently.
RECOMMENDATION 8
Ensure the new system has all required fields necessary for accurate reporting with
Department of Administrative Service’s annual Risk Report, and ensure key fields
require input before an asset can be logged.
a. Choose a system that works on mobile devices, even when there is no internet or
cell signal.
Agree or Disagree with
Recommendation
Target date to complete
implementation activities
Name and phone number
of specific point of contact
for implementation
Agree  June 2029
Alan Freudenthal,
971-446-1944
Narrative for Recommendation 8
OPRD agrees with this recommendation and is actively planning for replacement of the agency’s
aging asset management system. A modern system will enable required fields for accurate
reporting, support mobile use in field environments with limited or nonexistent connectivity, and
ensure alignment with DAS Risk Report requirements.
The existing system, OPRIS, was developed in-house by the agency in the early 2000s and is
well overdue for replacement due to outdated architecture that is no longer supported. It is unable
to integrate with new technology necessary for operation today. The agency has begun planning
work toward a replacement system, and the project is currently proceeding through the DAS
Enterprise Information Services (EIS) Stage Gate process. This future system should ensure that
all required reporting fields are incorporated and that critical data fields are required at the point
of entry.
March 9, 2026   Page | 6
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
While OPRD is planning for a new asset management system, budget constraints and rising costs
require careful prioritization and phased implementation. Despite limited resources, OPRD is
committed to securing a modern solution that meets operational and reporting needs and
improves asset data accuracy.
Please contact Jo Niehaus, Senior Policy Advisor, at 503-580-9210 with any questions.
Sincerely,
Stefanie Coons
Interim Director
Oregon Parks and Recreation Department
Stefanie Coons (Mar 9, 2026 07:58:30 PDT)
Stefanie Coons
Secretary of State Tobias Read
Audits Director Steve Bergmann
Oregon Audits Division
255 Capitol St NE, Suite 180
Salem OR 97310
(503) 986-2255
audits.sos@oregon.gov
sos.oregon.gov/audits