OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
An Investment Pool of the State of Oregon
Financial Statements
For the Year Ended June 30, 2026
This page intentionally left blank.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM POOL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Financial Section
Independent Auditor’s Report ................................................................................................................ 1
Financial Statements:
Statement of Net Position ................................................................................................................ 3
Statement of Changes in Net Position ............................................................................................. 4
Notes to Financial Statements .......................................................................................................... 5
Other Report
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
and on Compliance and Other Matters ................................................................................................. 11
FINANCIAL SECTION
www.mgocpa.com Macias Gini & O’Connell LLP
500 Capitol Mall, Suite 2200
Sacramento, CA 95814
Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
To the Honorable Elizabeth Steiner, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements
Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, an in ternal investment
pool managed by the Oregon State Treasury on behalf of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended
June 30, 2026, and the related notes to the financial statements, as listed in the table of contents.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, as of June 30, 2026, and the changes
in financial position for the year then ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAS) and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing
Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States (Government Auditing Standards). Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit
of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are required to be independent of the Oregon State
Treasury and the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool , and to meet our other ethical responsibilities, in
accordance with the relevant ethical requirements relating to our audit. We believe that the audit evidence
we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit opinion.
Emphasis of Matter
As discussed in Note 1, the financial statements present only the Oregon Intermediate  Term Pool and do
not purport to, and do not, present fairly the financial position of the State of Oregon or the Oregon State
Treasury, as of June 30, 2026, or the changes in its financial position for the year then ended in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our opinion is not modified
with respect to this matter.
Responsibilities of Management for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and for the
design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation
of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free
from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not absolute assurance and therefore is not
a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with GAAS  and Government Auditing Standards will
always detect a material misstatement when it exists. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement
resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery,
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Misstatements are considered
material if there is a substantial likelihood that, individually or in the aggregate, they would influence the
judgment made by a reasonable user based on the financial statements.
In performing an audit in accordance with GAAS and Government Auditing Standards, we
• Exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit.
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, and design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks. Such procedures
include examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures
that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Oregon’s State Treasury’s internal control. Accordingly, no such opinion is
expressed.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of significant
accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluate the overall presentation of the
financial statements.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit, significant audit findings, and certain internal control-related matters
that we identified during the audit.
Other Reporting Required by Government Auditing Standards
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards , we have also issued our report dated
September 8, 2026, on our consideration of the Oregon State Treasury’s  internal control over financial
reporting and on our tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant
agreements and other matters. The purpose of that report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of
internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to provide
an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting or
on compliance. That report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with Government
Auditing Standards in considering the Oregon State Treasury’s internal control over financial reporting and
compliance.
Sacramento, California
September 8, 2026
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Statement of Net Position
June 30, 2026
(Dollars in Thousands)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents (Note 2) 6,941$
Investments (Note 2) 372,386
Receivable for Investments Sold 233,072
Securities Lending Collateral  (Note 3) 5,100
Accrued Interest Receivable 1,447
Total Assets 618,946
Liabilities:
Payable for Investments Purchased 226,490
Obligations Under Securities Lending  (Note 3) 5,100
Total Liabilities 231,590
Net Position:
Held for Pool Participants 387,356
Total Net Position 387,356$
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Statement of Changes in Net Position
For the Year Ended June 30, 2026
(Dollars in Thousands)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
Additions
Investment Earnings:
Interest, Dividends and Other 16,706$
Net Decrease in Fair Value of Investments (2,338)
Securities Lending Income 367
Total Investment Earnings 14,735
Less Investment Costs:
Investment Activity Costs (Note 4) 255
Securities Lending Costs 305
Net Investment Earnings 14,175
Change in Net Position Held for Pool Participants 14,175
Net Position - Beginning 373,181
Net Position - Ending 387,356$
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2026
(1) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Reporting Entity – The Oregon Intermediate Term Pool (“Pool”) is an intermediate term fixed income
investment vehicle of the State of Oregon (State). Several state agencies participate in the Pool. During
the year ended June 30, 2026, the Pool did not have any non- agency entity participants, thus it is an
internal investment pool.
The Pool is not registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment
company. The State’s investment policies are governed by Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) and the
Oregon Investment Council (Council). The State Treasurer is the investment officer for the Council
and is responsible for all funds entrusted to the Oregon State Treasury (OST). These funds must be
invested, and the investments managed, as a prudent investor would, exercising reasonable care, skill
and caution. Investments in the Pool are further governed by guidelines  approved by the Council,
establishing diversification percentages and specifying the types and maturities of investments. The
Pool guidelines permit securities lending transactions as well as investments in repurchase and reverse
repurchase agreements. Pool guidelines are discussed in greater detail in the Investments section of
Note 2.
The Pool is authorized under ORS 293.861 and ORS 293.863. Standards for investment of the P ool
may be found in ORS 293.701 to 293.857 . Pursuant to ORS 293.863(5), State agencies have the
opportunity to participate in this investment pool subject to application requiring evidence of statutory
authority to invest in the Pool and subsequent approval by the OST.
Basis of Accounting – These statements are prepared using the economic resources measurement focus
and the accrual basis of accounting. Trade date accounting is observed, which means that purchases
and sales of securities are recorded on the day the trade takes place with a corresponding payable to or
receivable from the broker. Changes in the fair value of investments are recognized daily. The fair value
of investments is determined daily and is equal to market price.
Cash and Cash Equivalents – Investments with original maturities of three months or less are
considered cash equivalents and are reported at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. Cash
Equivalents also include any cash held with the custodian, and amounts invested in the Oregon Short
Term Fund (OSTF), which is an external investment pool open to State agencies and local governments
that acts as a demand deposit account.
Investments – Investments with remaining maturities of less than ninety days are carried at amortized
cost, provided that the fair value of these instruments is not significantly affected by the impairment of
the credit standing of the issuer or by other factors. Amortized cost approximates fair value. Investments
with longer maturities are carried at fair value.
Participants’ equity; distributions of interest – The value of each participant’s investment is
determined on a proportional basis to the net fair  value of the entire portfolio. Shares of the Pool
represent a divisible interest in the net value of underlying investments, accrued income and expenses.
Interest income and capital gains are not distributed to participants  but are reflected in the underlying
net position.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2026
(2) Investments
Investments – On June 30, 2026, the Pool reported investments of $379.3 million of which $6.9 million
is classified as Cash and Cash Equivalents on the Statement of Net Position. The Pool’s guidelines
establish the Pool ’s permitted investments and parameters  for managing the various types of risk
associated with these investments (see the current portfolio guidelines at (https://www.oregon.gov/
treasury/invested-for-oregon/pages/oregon-intermediate-term-investments.aspx#OITP.) The different
risks are discussed below.
Schedule of Investment Characteristics
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type Par Value
Reported
Amount
Weighted
Average Coupon
Weighted Average
Modified Duration
Cash and Cash Equivalents (1)  $      6,941  $      6,941 4.00 0.20
Asset-Backed Securities        31,345        31,410 5.22 2.22
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities             425             417 3.62 2.34
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations             898             898 4.99 0.05
Mortgage-Backed Securities        29,406        27,982 5.18 4.45
Municipal Debt             106             106 3.62 0.32
Corporate Debt        70,751        70,273 5.12 3.72
U.S. Treasury Debt      241,872      241,300 4.17 4.01
Total 381,744$  379,327$  4.50 3.76
(1) Cash and Cash Equivalents include $6,941 invested in the OSTF.
A. Interest rate and Credit risk
Interest rate risk  is the risk that changes in interest rates will adversely affect the fair value of an
investment. OST Investment staff manages this risk by limiting the duration of investments held by the
Pool. The portfolio guidelines require that the portfolio maintain a modified duration, a measure of
interest rate risk,  of +/- 20% (percent) relative to the duration of the Bloomberg Intermediate U.S.
Government/Credit Total Return Index (Benchmark). The weighted average duration for the Pool and
the Benchmark at June 30, 2026, was 3.76 years and 3.81 years, respectively. The maximum maturity
for any single investment should not be greater than  12.25 years from settlement date . Asset-backed
securities, mortgage-backed securities,  and commercial mortgage -backed securities use weighted
average life (WAL) as a proxy for maturity.
Credit risk is the risk that an issuer or other counterparty to an investment will not fulfill its obligation.
The Pool’s guidelines require that all investments meet minimum ratings requirements at the time of
purchase. Minimum required ratings are subject to investment type as dictated by the Pool’s guidelines.
Corporate debt, municipal debt, asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities must be rated investment
grade or higher at time of purchase.  Foreign government securities are required to have a minimum
credit rating of AA - or Aa3 by at least two Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations
(NRSROs). Collateralized Loan obligations must be rated AAA at the time of purchase.
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2026
Securities downgraded below investment grade  can be retained at the  Senior Investment Officer ’s
discretion. Rating groups are determined using the lowest actual rating from an NRSRO and are shown
in the table that follows.
Interest Rate Risk and Credit Risk
(Dollars in Thousands)
Investment Type
Weighted
Av erage
Modi fi ed
Duration
Reported
Amount AAA AA A BBB Not Rated Exe mpt
Asset-Backed Securities 2.22 31,410$      3,924$      9,601$      14,305$    3,580$      -$             -$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities 2.34 417             417           -               -               -               -               -
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations 0.05 898             898           -               -               -               -               -
U.S. Agency Residential
Mortgage-Backed Securities (1) 4.45 27,982        -               -               -               -               26,960      1,022
Municipal Debt 0.32 106             106           -               -               -               -               -
Corporate Debt 3.72 70,273        100           -               5,987        64,186      -               -
U.S. Treasury Debt 4.01 241,300      -               -               -               -               -               241,300
Ex ternal Investm ent Pool (2) 0.20 6,941          -               -               -               -               6,941        -
Total 379,327$ 5,445$    9,601$    20,292$  67,766$  33,901$  242,322$
(1)
(2) The Oregon Short Term  Fund is not rated by the credit ratings agencies. Its holdings carry a com posite credit quality rating of AA at June 30, 2026.
U.S. federal debt carries an im plicit guarantee of the U.S. G overnm ent. For credit quality rules, federal debt is considered to be highest quality, ex cept when
rated differently.
B. Custodial credit risk
Custodial credit risk for investments is the risk that, in the event of the failure of the counterparty to a
transaction, the pool will not be able to recover the value of an investment or collateral securities in the
possession of an outside party. The Pool’s guidelines provide that investments are delivered to and held
by a third-party custodian, which holds the Pool’s securities in the State of Oregon’s name. All trades
where applicable are executed by delivery vs. payment (DVP) to ensure that securities are deposited in
an eligible financial institution prior to the release of funds.
C. Concentration of credit risk
Concentration of credit risk is the risk of loss attributed to the magnitude of a fund’s investment in a
single issuer. The Pool guidelines provide that the maximum that may be invested in any one issuer, as
a percentage of the Pool ’s total investments, is five percent, excluding the OSTF, U .S. Treasuries or
U.S. agency securities or instrumentalities. The Pool may invest up to 100 percent in those securities.
On June 30, 2026, the Pool  did not hold investments with any one issuer that exceeded these limits .
Further, no more than 5 percent of the Pool’s investments were with any one issuer apart from U .S.
government securities.
D. Foreign currency risk
The Pool guidelines prohibit investments that are not U.S. dollar-denominated; therefore, the Pool is
not exposed to this risk.
(3) Securities Lending
The OST has authorized its custodian to act as its agent in the lending of the Pool’s securities pursuant
to a form of loan agreement, in accordance with Pool  investment policies. There have been no
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2026
significant violations of the provisions of the securities lending agreement.  The State’s securities
lending agent lent  short-term and fixed income securities and received as collateral U.S. dollar -
denominated cash. Borrowers were required to deliver cash collateral for each loan equal to not less
than 102 percent of the market value of the loaned security. The State may pledge or sell the collateral
securities received only in the event of a borrower default. The State has the ability to impose
restrictions during the year on the amount of the loans that the securities lending agent made on its
behalf, but did not impose any such limits during the year ended June 30, 202 6. The State is fully
indemnified by its securities lending agent against losses due to borrower default. There were no losses
during the year from the failure of borrowers to return loaned securities.
The Pool’s lending agent uses an investment fund to reinvest cash collateral received on behalf of the
OITP and other S tate agencies managed by the OST, exclusive of the Oregon Public Employees
Retirement Fund. The investment fund used to reinvest cash collateral is not rated and had a weighted
average maturity of 22.14 days at June 30, 2026. The balances of securities on loan, cash collateral
received, and invested collateral at fair value are presented in the schedule below:
Schedule of Securities Lending Balances
(Dollars in Thousands)
Collateral Received
Cash Non-Cash Total
U.S. Agency Securities 4,996$                     5,100$       -$               5,100$       5,100$
Total 4,996$                     5,100$       -$               5,100$       5,100$
Securities on Loan
at Fair Value
Invested Cash Collateral
at Fair Value1
1 Cash collateral is reinvested in an investment fund that is priced based on net asset value (NAV).
The State and borrowers maintained the right to terminate all securities lending transactions on demand.
As a consequence the maturities of investments made with cash collateral generally do not match the
maturities of the loaned securities. As of June 30, 2026, the State had no credit risk exposure to
borrowers related to securities on loan.
(4) Management and Administration Fees
In accordance with ORS 293.718, the OST may deduct monthly 0.5 basis points of the most recent fair
value of assets under management for administration and portfolio management. For the year ended
June 30, 2026, the OST charged the Pool a monthly rate of 0. 435 basis points based on assets under
management in the Pool. Fees are deducted from investment income before distributions to participants.
Fees and other expenses charged to the Pool totaled $255 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2026.
(5) Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in
an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.  Observable inputs are
developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of the reporting entity.
Unobservable inputs are developed based on the best information available about the assumptions
market participants would use in pricing the asset. The classification of securities within the fair value
OREGON INTERMEDIATE TERM FUND
Notes to Financial Statements
June 30, 2026
hierarchy is based upon the activity level in the market for the security type and the inputs used to
determine their fair value, as follows:
• Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
• Level 2 – Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical
or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all
significant inputs are observable.
• Level 3 –  Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which significant inputs are
unobservable.
Lev el 1 Lev el 2 Lev el 3 Total
Investm ents:
Asset-Backed Securities -$                   31,410$             -$                   31,410$
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities -                     417                    -                     417
Collateralized Mortgage Obligation -                     898                    -                     898
U.S. Agency Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities -                     27,982               -                     27,982
Municipal Debt -                     106                    -                     106
Corporate Debt -                     70,273               -                     70,273
U.S. Treasury Debt -                     241,300             -                     241,300
Total -$                  372,386$         -$                  372,386$
Assets and Liabilities at Fair Value as of June 30, 2026
Fair Value Measurements
(Dollars in Thousands)
The Pool’s investments, other than those with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days, are
valued using the latest bid prices or evaluated quotes from independent pricing vendors. T hird-party
vendors use a variety of methods when pricing these securities that incorporate relevant observable
market data to arrive at an estimate of what a buyer in the marketplace would pay for a security under
current market conditions. Investments with remaining maturities of fewer than ninety days are carried
at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. All of the Pool’s investments at June 30, 2026, are
considered level 2.
This page intentionally left blank.
OTHER REPORT
www.mgocpa.com Macias Gini & O’Connell LLP
500 Capitol Mall, Suite 2200
Sacramento, CA 95814
Independent Auditor’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and
on Compliance and Other Matters Based on an Audit of Financial Statements
Performed in Accordance With Government Auditing Standards
To the Honorable Tina Kotek
Governor of Oregon
To the Honorable Elizabeth Steiner, State Treasurer
Oregon Investment Council
We have audited, in accordance with the auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Government Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States ( Government Auditing Standards ), the financial
statements of the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool, an internal investment pool managed by the Oregon State
Treasury on behalf of the State of Oregon, as of and for the year ended June 30, 2026, and the related notes
to the financial statements, which collectively comprise the Oregon Intermediate Term Pool’s financial
statements, and have issued our report thereon dated September 8, 2026.
Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In planning and performing our audit of the financial statements, we considered the Oregon State Treasury’s
internal control over financial reporting (internal control) as a basis for designing audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances for the purpose of expressing our opinions on the financial statements, but
not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury’s internal
control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of the Oregon State Treasury ’s
internal control.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management
or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct,
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the entity’s
financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected, on a timely basis. A  significant
deficiency is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control that is less severe than a
material weakness, yet important enough to merit attention by those charged with governance.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the first paragraph of this
section and was not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be material
weaknesses or significant deficiencies. Given th ese limitations, during our audit we did not identify any
deficiencies in internal control that we consider to be material weaknesses. However, material weaknesses
or significant deficiencies may exist that were not identified.
Report on Compliance and Other Matters
As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Oregon State Treasury’s financial statements
are free from material misstatement, we performed tests of its compliance with certain provisions of laws,
regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material
effect on the financial statements. However, providing an opinion on compliance with those provisions was
not an objective of our audit, and accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. The results of our tests
disclosed no instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported under Government
Auditing Standards.
Purpose of This Report
The purpose of this report is solely to describe the scope of our testing of internal control and compliance
and the results of that testing, and not to provide an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal
control or on compliance. This report is an integral part of an audit performed in accordance with
Government Auditing Standards in considering the entity’s internal control and compliance. Accordingly,
this communication is not suitable for any other purpose.
Sacramento, California
September 8, 2026